# 2014_CFR_40-35.927-2_Grant_Amendments.pdf

# Environmental Protection Agency

## § 35.927–1 Infiltration/inflow analysis.

(a) The infiltration/inflow analysis shall demonstrate the nonexistence or possible existence of excessive infiltration/inflow in the sewer system. The analysis should identify the presence, flow rate, and type of infiltration/inflow conditions which exist in the sewer system.

(b) For determination of the possible existence of excessive infiltration/inflow, the analysis shall include an estimate of the cost of eliminating the infiltration/inflow conditions. These costs shall be compared with estimated total costs for transportation and treatment of the infiltration/inflow. Cost-effectiveness analysis guidelines (Appendix A to this subpart) should be consulted with respect to this determination.

(c) If the infiltration/inflow analysis demonstrates the existence or possible existence of excessive infiltration/inflow a detailed plan for a sewer system evaluation survey shall be included in the analysis. The plan shall outline the tasks to be performed in the survey and their estimated costs.

## § 35.927–2 Sewer system evaluation survey.

(a) The sewer system evaluation survey shall identify the location, estimated flow rate, method of rehabilitation and cost of rehabilitation versus cost of transportation and treatment for each defined source of infiltration/inflow.

(b) A report shall summarize the results of the sewer system evaluation survey. In addition, the report shall include:
* (1) A justification for each sewer section cleaned and internally inspected.
* (2) A proposed rehabilitation program for the sewer system to eliminate all defined excessive infiltration/inflow.

## § 35.927–3 Rehabilitation.

(a) Subject to State concurrence, the Regional Administrator may authorize the grantee to perform minor rehabilitation concurrently with the sewer system evaluation survey in any step under a grant if sufficient funding can be made available and there is no adverse environmental impact. However, minor rehabilitation work in excess of $10,000 which is not accomplished with force account labor (see § 35.936–14(a)(2)), must be procured through formal advertising in compliance with the applicable requirements of §§ 35.938 *et seq.* and 35.939, the statutory requirements referenced in §§ 30.415 through 30.415–4 of this subchapter, and other applicable provisions of part 30.

(b) Grant assistance for a step 3 project segment consisting of major rehabilitation work may be awarded concurrently with step 2 work for the design of the new treatment works.

(c) The scope of each treatment works project defined within the facilities plan as being required for implementation of the plan, and for which Federal assistance will be requested, shall define (1) any necessary new treatment works construction and (2) any rehabilitation work (including replacement) determined by the sewer system evaluation to be necessary for the elimination of excessive infiltration/inflow. However, rehabilitation which should be a part of the applicant’s normal operation and maintenance responsibilities shall not be included within the scope of a step 3 treatment works project.

(d) Only rehabilitation of the grantee’s sewage collection system is eligible for grant assistance. However, the grantee’s costs of rehabilitation beyond “Y” fittings (see definition of “sewage collection system” in § 35.905) may be treated on an incremental cost basis.

## § 35.927–4 Sewer use ordinance.

Each applicant for grant assistance for a step 2 or step 3 project shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Regional Administrator that a sewer use ordinance or other legally binding requirement will be enacted and enforced in each jurisdiction served by the treatment works project before the completion of construction. The ordinance shall prohibit any new connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer portions of the sewer system and shall insure that new sewers and connections to the sewer system are properly designed and constructed.
