# wsdoe-letter-9-4-2009.pdf

# STATE OF WASHINGTON  
## DEPARTMENT OF ECOLOGY  
PO Box 47600 • Olympia, WA 98504-7600 • 360-407-6000  
711 for Washington Relay Service • Persons with a speech disability can call 877-833-6341  

August 25, 2009  

City of Tekoa  
Attn: Kynda Browning, Clerk/Treasurer  
Post Office Box 927  
419 Washington Street  
Tekoa, Washington 99033  

**RE: Request for Comments—City of Tekoa 2011 Water/Sewer Improvement Projects**  

Dear Ms. Browning,  

The Department of Ecology, Shorelands and Environmental Assistance Program received your request for comments regarding the replacement of portions of the City’s drinking water system and the City’s sewer collection system to address deficiencies related to the age and condition of the systems. I have provided some general comments below:  

1. If the project will impact wetlands or require in-water (below the ordinary high water mark) work, a Section 401 Water Quality Certification may be necessary. The information provided indicates that there will be a stream crossing within the project area. Please contact the Army Corps of Engineers (Tim Erkel, 509-238-4570) and the Federal Permit Manager at Ecology’s Eastern Regional Office (Michael Maher, 509-329-3584) to discuss the project and any potential permitting requirements.  
2. Since the proposal includes work within shoreline jurisdiction (usually within 200 feet of a waterbody), please work with local permitting staff to discuss shoreline permit requirements. For additional information about shoreline permits, please contact Michael Maher, Department of Ecology, at 509-329-3584.  

Feel free to contact me if you have any questions. I can be reached at 360-407-7421 or jemo461@ecy.wa.gov.  

Sincerely,  

Jessica Moore  
Federal Consistency Coordinator  
Environmental Review and Transportation Section  
Shorelands and Environmental Assistance Program
