# environmental-assessment.pdf

# LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

December 4th, 2017

City of Tekoa  
P.O. Box 927  
Tekoa, WA 99033

**ATTN:** Kynda Browning, Clerk

**RE:** 2018 I & I Reduction Project – 30393.034.01

We are sending the following items via: *Mail*  
*(If enclosures are not as noted, please contact us.)*

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>ITEM</th>
      <th># OF COPIES</th>
      <th>DATE/NO.</th>
      <th>DESCRIPTION</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>12/4/17</td>
      <td>NEPA</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>2</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>3</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**Comments:**  
If you have any questions and/or concerns, please contact Matt Morkert at (509) 838-3810.

**Signed:**  
Matt Morkert  
Vice President

11707 E Montgomery Drive, Spokane Valley, WA 99206  
PH. 509.838.3810 ❖ Fax 509.624.0355

---

# Environmental Assessment  
*(24 CFR 58.36) (Revised 8/04)*

**Grantee/Responsible Entity** (City, Town or County): _City of Tekoa_

**Grantee/Responsible Entity Address:**  
_P.O. Box 927/ 419 N Washington, Tekoa, WA 99033_

**Certifying Officer** (Jurisdiction Chief Administrative Official): _Mayor John Jaeger_

**Preparer:** _Anthony Fischer, E.I.T. (Century West Engineering Corp.)_

**Date** (Month/Year): _Nov, 2017_

**Estimated Total Project Cost:** _$790,000_

**List Proposed Funding Sources and Amounts:**  
*CDBG Grant:* _$750,000_  
*Local Public:* _$40,000_

**Project Name & Brief Description:** _2018 I/I Reduction Project_

**Project Location:**  
_The project area is located within The City of Tekoa, including portions of Section 13 and Section 24, Township 20 North, Range 45 East and Section 19, Township 20 North, Range 46 East. Sewer lines to be replaced include those along East Main Street and Lindsey Street, North Crosby Street and Poplar Street, and along the ballpark from Warren Street to Seamon Road._

**Project Representative:** _John Jaeger (Mayor)_

**Telephone Number:** _509-284-3861_

**Conditions for Approval:**  
(List all mitigation measures adopted by the responsible entity to eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts. These conditions must be included in project contracts or other relevant documents as requirements).  
_[24 CFR 58.40(d), 40 CFR 1505.2(c)]_

_The City shall require contractor to comply with all applicable stormwater, air quality, and erosion control requirements. Contractor shall use best management practices and construction practices to conduct work in a professional manner._

----

### FINDING: [58.40(g)]  
- [x] **Finding of No Significant Impact**  
  (The project will not result in a significant impact on the quality of the human environment)  
- [ ] **Finding of Significant Impact**  
  (The project may significantly affect the quality of the human environment)

----

<table>
<tr>
  <td>Preparer Name and Title</td>
  <td>Print</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Preparer Signature</td>
  <td>Date</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Chief Administrative Official Name and Title</td>
  <td>Print</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Chief Administrative Official Signature</td>
  <td>Date</td>
</tr>
</table>


---

# ATTACHMENT 6-F (2)  
## NEPA

### Statement of Purpose and Need for the Proposal: [40 CFR 1508.9(b)]:

*The City of Tekoa completed a Comprehensive Sewer System Plan in November 2006, in which numerous improvements to the sewer system were identified.*

The preparation of the plan was a requirement of the City’s NPDES permit. The plan identified several improvements to the system that were required to meet NPDES permit requirements to reduce infiltration and inflow. Many of the improvements in the plan were sewer line replacements along Hangman Creek. There are also several improvements across the city in areas with seasonally high groundwater.

This project is needed to reduce infiltration and inflow to the sewer system and reduce the influent flows to the treatment facility to meet NPDES permit requirements.

### Description of the Proposal:  
Include all contemplated actions, which logically are either geographically, or functionally a composite part of the project, regardless of the source of funding. [24 CFR 58.32, 40 CFR 1508.25]

*Some of the options considered for the sewer line rehabilitation include in-situ pipe lining, rerouting the sewer lines to existing right-of-way, and replacing the sewer lines along the same routes.*

### Existing Conditions and Trends:  
Describe the existing conditions of the project area and its surroundings, and trends likely to continue in the absence of the project. [24 CFR 58.40(a)]

*The project occurs in three separate areas of the City and occurs mostly along existing roadways.*

*There is a 5 block stretch of sewer slated for replacement along Washington, Poplar, and Crosby Streets, which includes a residential area, a park, Highway-27 and commercial businesses.*

*An approximate 2 block length of sewer is slated to be replaced from Warren Street, through vegetation and along an access road behind the baseball field, along Howard Street, and to Seamon Road.*

*Approximately 1700 LF of sewer will be replaced along East Main Street And Lindsey Street. Both stretches occur within residential areas.*

*The area surrounding Tekoa is mostly agricultural farmland.*

The project is a replacement of existing sewer from existing areas, typically outside of Public ROW to Public ROW. If an existing sewer is located outside of the right-of-way, it will be replaced within the right-of-way.

----

### **Statutory Checklist** [24CFR §58.5]  
Record the determinations made regarding each listed statute, executive order or regulation. Provide appropriate source documentation. [Note reviews or consultations completed as well as any applicable permits or approvals obtained or required. Note dates of contact or page references]. Provide compliance or consistency documentation. Attach additional material as appropriate. Note conditions, attenuation or mitigation measures required.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Factors</th>
<th>Determinations and Compliance Documentation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic Preservation<br>[36 CFR 800]</td>
<td><em>Project will not threaten or demolish historic or culturally important properties.</em><br><br>DAHP Letter: March 30<sup>th</sup>, 2010<br>Spokane Tribe Letter: March 25<sup>th</sup>, 2010</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="2">ATTACHMENT 6-F (3)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><b>Floodplain Management</b><br>[24 CFR 55, Executive Order 11988]</td>
      <td><i>The project will have no impacts on existing floodplains.</i><br>FEMA Flood Maps</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Wetlands Protection</b><br>[Executive Order 11990]</td>
      <td><i>Project does not involve new construction near or in any wetlands.</i><br>USFWS Wetlands Map</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Coastal Zone Management Act</b><br>[Sections 307(c), (d)]</td>
      <td><i>Project does not take place in one of the 15 counties covered by the Washington State CZM Program.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Sole Source Aquifers</b><br>[40 CFR 149]</td>
      <td><i>Project is not located within a USA-EPA designated sole source aquifer.<br><br>Project does not withdrawal from a sole source aquifer.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Endangered Species Act</b><br>[50 CFR 402]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact endangered species<br><br>WSDFW Letter, July 24<sup>th</sup> 2009</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Wild and Scenic Rivers Act</b><br>[Sections 7 (b), (c)]</td>
      <td><i>The project is not located within 1 mile of a listed Wild & Scenic River.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Air Quality</b><br>[Clean Air Act, Sections 176 (c) and (d), and 40 CFR 6, 51, 93]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact air quality.<br><br>WSDOE Letter, September 4<sup>th</sup> 2009</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Farmland Protection Policy Act</b><br>[7 CFR 658]</td>
      <td><i>Project is located on City owned property and will have no impact on Farmland.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Environmental Justice</b><br>[Executive Order 12898]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact LMI or minority populations.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td colspan="2"><b>HUD Environmental Standards</b>
---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3" style="text-align:right;">ATTACHMENT 6-F (4)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3">Land Development</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Conformance with Comprehensive Plans and Zoning</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>The project involves replacing existing sewer lines. No new sewer lines will be constructed.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Compatibility and Urban Impact</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>This project will not encourage growth outside of the existing city limits.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Slope</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not significantly affect topography.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Erosion</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will have temporary effect on erosion during construction activities. Contractor will be required to use Best Management Practices to prevent erosion during construction and will restore areas disturbed by construction activities to pre-construction condition.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Soil Suitability</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>The project will not construct any new structures. The project will rehabilitate existing structures.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Hazards and Nuisances including Site Safety</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not contribute to or increase hazards or nuisances</em>.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Energy Consumption</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td><em>Project will reduce energy consumption at the City wastewater treatment plant.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th colspan="3"><strong>Noise</strong> - Contribution to Community Noise Levels</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td></td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not increase ambient noise levels.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th colspan="3"><strong>Air Quality</strong><br>Effects of Ambient Air Quality on Project and Contribution to Community Pollution Levels</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td></td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will neither affect ambient air quality nor contribute to community pollution levels. Finished project does produce air emissions.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th colspan="3"><strong>Environmental Design</strong><br>Visual Quality - Coherence, Diversity, Compatible Use and Scale</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td></td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>All of the work will be subsurface and will not have a visual aesthetic component.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th colspan="3">Socioeconomic</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Demographic Character Changes</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not impact demographics.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Displacement</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not displace any residential or commercial properties.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Employment and Income Patterns</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project will not impact employment and income patterns.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th colspan="3"><strong>Community Facilities and Services</strong></th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Educational Facilities</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not impact education facilities.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Commercial Facilities</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not affect commercial facilities.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Health Care</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not affect health care.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Social Services</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not affect social services</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Solid Waste</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not affect solid waste facilities.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Waste Water</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td><em>Project improves the wastewater collection system by reducing infiltration and inflow to the system and reducing flows to the wastewater treatment facility. The project is identified in the 2006 Comprehensive Sewer Plan.</em></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Storm Water</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><em>Project does not affect the City’s stormwater facilities.</em></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3">ATTACHMENT 6-F (5)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Water Supply</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>The project does not affect water supply.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td rowspan="3">Public Safety</td>
      <td>- Police</td>
      <td><i>The project will not affect police services.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Fire</td>
      <td><i>The project will not affect fire services.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Emergency Medical</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect emergency medical facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td rowspan="3">Open Space and Recreation</td>
      <td>- Open Space</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect open space.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Recreation</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect recreation facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Cultural Facilities</td>
      <td>
        <i>DAHP Letter, March 30<sup>th</sup> 2010<br>
        Spokane Tribe Letter, March 25<sup>th</sup>, 2010</i>
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Transportation</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not impact local transportation system.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><b>Natural Features</b></th>
      <th><b>Source or Documentation</b></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Water Resources</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not affect water resources.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Surface Water</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>No surface water impacts are expected.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Unique Natural Features and Agricultural Lands</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not affect unique natural features.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Vegetation and Wildlife</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will have minimal effect on vegetation. All areas disturbed by Construction activities will be re-seeded and restored to pre-construction condition. Project will not affect wildlife.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><b>Other Factors</b></th>
      <th><b>Source or Documentation</b></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Flood Disaster Protection Act [Flood Insurance] [§58.6(a)]</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>Section 58.6 requires compliance with the Flood Disaster Protection Act. However, under <b>24 CFR 55.1 (b)(1)</b> the prohibitions are not applicable to HUD financial assistance under the State-administered CDBG Program (24 CFR part 570, subpart I). Therefore, the Act does not apply.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Coastal Barrier Resources Act/ Coastal Barrier Improvement Act [§58.6(c)]</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>Section 58.6 also requires compliance with the Coastal Barrier Resources Act. There are no Coastal Barrier Resource Areas in Washington State. Therefore, the Act does not apply.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Airport Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone Disclosure [§58.6(d)]</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does occur near an airport.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Other Factors</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


---

# Summary of Findings and Conclusions

*Based upon our review of the project, it will not have a significant impact on the surrounding environment.*

## ALTERNATIVES TO THE PROPOSED ACTION  
### Alternatives and Project Modifications Considered  
[24 CFR 58.40(e), Ref. 40 CFR 1508.9]  
(Identify other reasonable courses of action that were considered and not selected, such as other sites, design modifications, or other uses of the subject site. Describe the benefits and adverse impacts to the human environment of each alternative and the reasons for rejecting it.)

The alternative that the City considered for this project was *in-situ pipe lining.*

This alternative was not viable because it is necessary to relocate many of the sewer pipes out of private properties and/or saturated areas.

### No Action Alternative [24 CFR 58.40(e)]  
(Discuss the benefits and adverse impacts to the human environment of not implementing the preferred alternative).

*No Action would lead the City to be in violation of their NPDES permit and potentially open themselves up to lawsuits. The flows to the treatment plant would keep increasing and the level of treatment of the sewer flows would decrease. This would increase the level of pollutants in the treatment plant effluent and be an adverse impact to the human environment.*

### Mitigation Measures Recommended [24 CFR 58.40(d), 40 CFR 1508.20]  
(Recommend feasible ways in which the proposal or external factors relating to the proposal should be modified in order to eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts.)

*The proposed project is expected to have minimal impact on the environment. The City will require the Construction Contractor to use best management practices to prevent environmental impacts. The finished project will not have a significant impact.*

## Additional Studies Performed  
(Attach studies or summaries)

* City of Tekoa Comprehensive Sewer Plan, November 2006.  
* City of Tekoa Infiltration and Inflow Analysis, August 2017

## List of Sources, Agencies and Persons Consulted  
[40 CFR 1508.9(b)]

* Washington Department of Archeology and Historic Preservation  
* Spokane Tribe of Indians  
* FEMA Flood Map Service Center  
* US Fish & Wildlife National Wetlands Inventory Map  
* Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

---

# STATE OF WASHINGTON  
## DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY & HISTORIC PRESERVATION  
*1063 S. Capitol Way, Suite 106 • Olympia, Washington 98501*  
*Mailing address: PO Box 48343 • Olympia, Washington 98504-8343*  
*(360) 586-3065 • Fax Number (360) 586-3067 • Website: www.dahp.wa.gov*  

March 30, 2010  

Ms. Janice Roderick  
USDA – Rural Development  
1835 Black Lake Blvd. SW, Suite B  
Olympia, Washington 98512-5716  

Re: City of Tekoa Water & Sewer Improvements Project  
Log No: 080609-05-USDA-RD  

Dear Ms. Roderick;  

Thank you for contacting our department. We have reviewed the professional archaeological survey report you provided for the proposed City of Tekoa Water & Sewer Improvements Project in Whitman County, Washington.  

We concur with your Determination of No Historic Properties Affected. We concur with the proposed stipulation for archaeological monitoring. Please provide the monitoring report when available.  

We would appreciate receiving any correspondence or comments from concerned tribes or other parties that you receive as you consult under the requirements of 36CFR800.4(a)(4).  

These comments are based on the information available at the time of this review and on the behalf of the State Historic Preservation Officer in conformance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and its implementing regulations 36CFR800. Should additional information become available, our assessment may be revised. In the event that archaeological or historic materials are discovered during project activities, work in the immediate vicinity should be discontinued, the area secured, and this department and the concerned tribe notified by you. Thank you for the opportunity to comment and a copy of these comments should be included in subsequent environmental documents.  

Sincerely,  

Robert G. Whitlam, Ph.D.  
State Archaeologist  
(360) 586-3080  
email: `rob.whitlam@dahp.wa.gov`  

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY & HISTORIC PRESERVATION  
*Protect the Past, Shape the Future*  

---

March 25, 2010

USDA  
Janice Roderick  
Environmental Coordinator  

**Re: Teko Washington, Sewer & Water System**

Ms. Roderick:

Thank you for contacting our Spokane Tribe of Indians is much appreciated.

Pursuant to compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act we are continuing consultation for this project.

We concur with your recommendations of the APE; we believe it is important to assure that the prior work efforts are incorporated into the final survey report to provide a definitive understanding of the site with definable boundaries.

Thank you for the cultural survey report, and the Spokane tribe would like to monitor this project. This area is a high concern to the tribe, we also meet secretary interior standards and specialize in our own culture.

However, if any artifacts or human remains are found upon inadvertent discovery, this office should be notified immediately and the work in the area cease.

Should additional information become available our assessment may be revised.

And consider this a positive action that will assist us in protecting our shared heritage.

Lem Lmts,

Randy Abrahamson  
Tribal Historic Preservation Officer.

---

PROJECT AREAS

APPROXIMATE SCALE  
400 0 400 FEET

NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM

FIRM  
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP

CITY OF  
TEKOA, WASHINGTON  
WHITMAN COUNTY

ONLY PANEL PRINTED

COMMUNITY-PANEL NUMBER  
530215 0001 B

EFFECTIVE DATE:  
AUGUST 1, 1979

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING  
AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
FEDERAL INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION

This is an official copy of a portion of the above referenced flood map. It was extracted using F-MIT On-Line. This map does not reflect changes or amendments which may have been made subsequent to the date on the title block. For the latest product information about National Flood Insurance Program flood maps check the FEMA Flood Map Store at www.msc.fema.gov

---

# U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  
## National Wetlands Inventory  

### 2018 I/I Reduction Project  
**PROJECT AREAS**  

----

### Map Description  
The map shows an aerial view of a town with highlighted project areas marked in magenta lines. Blue lines represent water bodies such as creeks and rivers. Green shaded areas indicate different types of wetlands.

----

### Wetlands Legend  

| Color | Wetland Type                      |
|-------|---------------------------------|
| Light Blue | Estuarine and Marine Deepwater |
| Teal       | Estuarine and Marine Wetland   |
| Light Green| Freshwater Emergent Wetland    |
| Dark Green | Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland |
| Blue       | Freshwater Pond                |
| Purple     | Lake                          |
| Tan        | Other                         |
| Cyan       | Riverine                      |

----

### Scale  
- 0 to 0.4 miles  
- 0 to 0.7 kilometers  
- Scale ratio: 1:13,121  

----

### Date  
November 28, 2017  

----

### Disclaimer  
>This map is for general reference only. The US Fish and Wildlife Service is not responsible for the accuracy or currentness of the base data shown on this map. All wetlands related data should be used in accordance with the layer metadata found on the Wetlands Mapper web site.

----

### Contact  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Standards and Support Team, wetlands_team@fws.gov  

----

### Footer  
National Wetlands Inventory (NWI)  
This page was produced by the NWI mapper  


---

# State of Washington  
## Department of Fish and Wildlife  

Mailing Address: 600 Capitol Way N. Olympia WA 98501-1091, (360) 902-2200, TDD (360) 902-2207  
Main Office Location: Natural Resources Building, 1111 Washington Street SE, Olympia WA  

Date: **July 21, 2009**  

Dear Habitats and Species Requester:  

Enclosed are the habitats and species products you requested from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). This package may also contain documentation to help you understand and use these products.  

These products only include information that WDFW maintains in a computer database. They are not an attempt to provide you with an official agency response as to the impacts of your project on fish and wildlife, nor are they designed to provide you with guidance on interpreting this information and determining how to proceed in consideration of fish and wildlife. These products only document the location of important fish and wildlife resources to the best of our knowledge. It is important to note that habitats or species may occur on the ground in areas not currently known to WDFW biologists, or in areas for which comprehensive surveys have not been conducted. Site-specific surveys are frequently necessary to rule out the presence of priority habitats or species.  

Your project may require further field inspection or you may need to contact our field biologists or others in WDFW to assist you in interpreting and applying this information. Generally, for assistance on a specific project, you should contact the WDFW Habitat Program Manager for your county and ask for the area habitat biologist for your project area. Refer to the enclosed directory for those contacts.  

Please note that sections potentially impacted by spotted owl management concerns are displayed on the 1:24,000 scale standard map products. If specific details on spotted owl site centers are required they must be requested separately.  

These products are designed for users external to the forest practice permit process and as such, do not reflect all the information pertinent to forest practice review. The Forest Practice Rules adopted August 22, 1997 by the Forest Practice Board and administered by the Washington Department of Natural Resources require forest practice applications to be screened against marbled murrelet detection areas and detection sections. Marbled murrelet detection locations are included in the standard priority habitats and species products, but the detection areas and detection sections are not included. If your project is affected by Forest Practice Regulations, you should specially request murrelet detection areas.  

WDFW updates this information as additional data become available. Because fish and wildlife species are mobile and because habitats and species information changes, project reviews for fish and wildlife should not rest solely on mapped information. Instead, they should also consider new information gathered from current field investigations. Remember, habitats and species information can only show that a species or habitat type is present, they cannot show that a species or habitat type is not present. These products should not be used for future projects. Please obtain updates rather than use outdated information.  

*November 2006*  

---

Because of the high volume of requests for information that WDFW receives, we need to charge for these products to recover some of our costs. Enclosed is an invoice itemizing the costs for your request and instructions for submitting payment.

Please note that sensitive information (e.g., threatened and/or endangered species) may be included in this request. These species are vulnerable to disturbances and harassment. In order to protect the viability of these species we request that you not disseminate the information as to their whereabouts. Please refer to these species presence in general terms. For example: "A Peregrine Falcon is located within two miles of the project area".

If your request required a Sensitive Fish and Wildlife Information Release Agreement and you or your organization has one on file, please refer to that document for conditions regarding release of this information.

For more information on WDFW you may visit our web site www.wdfw.wa.gov or visit the Priority Habitats and Species site at www.wdfw.wa.gov/hab/phspage.htm.

For information on the state's endangered, threatened, and sensitive plants as well as high quality wetland and terrestrial ecosystems, please contact the Washington Department of Natural Resources, Natural Heritage Program at P.O. Box 47014, Olympia Washington 98504-7014, by phone (360) 902-1667 or visit the web site at www.dnr.wa.gov/nhp.

If you have any questions or problems with the information you received please call me at (360) 902-2543 or fax (360) 902-2946.

Sincerely,

Lori Guggenmos, PHS Data Release Manager  
Priority Habitats and Species

Enclosures

---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## REGIONAL CONTACTS

For assistance with Priority Habitats and Species information, contact the appropriate regional office, listed below.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>County...</th>
      <th>Contact...</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Asotin, Columbia, Ferry, Garfield, Lincoln, Pend Oreille, Spokane, Stevens, Walla Walla, Whitman</td>
      <td>
        Region 1 Office<br>
        2315 North Discovery Place<br>
        Spokane Valley, WA 99216-1566<br>
        Phone: (509) 892-1001
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Adams, Chelan, Douglas, Grant, Okanogan</td>
      <td>
        Region 2 Office<br>
        1550 Alder Street NW<br>
        Ephrata, WA 98823-9699<br>
        Phone: (509) 754-4624
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Benton, Franklin, Kittitas, Yakima</td>
      <td>
        Region 3 Office<br>
        1701 South 24<sup>th</sup> Avenue<br>
        Yakima, WA 98902-5720<br>
        Phone: (509) 575-2740
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Island, King, San Juan, Skagit, Snohomish, Whatcom</td>
      <td>
        Region 4 Office<br>
        16018 Mill Creek Boulevard<br>
        Mill Creek, WA 98012-1296<br>
        Phone: (206) 775-1311
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Clark, Cowlitz, Klickitat, Lewis, Skamania, Wahkiakum</td>
      <td>
        Region 5 Office<br>
        2108 Grand Boulevard<br>
        Vancouver, WA 98661<br>
        Phone: (360) 696-6211
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Clallam, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, Kitsap, Mason, Pacific, Pierce, Thurston</td>
      <td>
        Region 6 Office<br>
        48 Deveonshire Road<br>
        Montesano, WA 98563-9618<br>
        Phone: (360) 249-4628
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## PRIORITY HABITATS AND SPECIES POLYGON CROSS REFERENCE REPORT  
### IN THE VICINITY OF T20R45E SECTION 13  

**Report Date:** July 20, 2009  

Priority Habitats and Species (PHS) polygons are labeled, on the map, with a unique number (PHS Poly#) and "+" symbol, roughly in the center of the polygon. This PHS Poly# refers to a list of form numbers (Form#) contained in the PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report, listed below. The Form#s refer to the attached Priority Habitats and Species Polygon Report. This report details each species or habitat depicted as a polygon on the map.

There will be some polygons, on the map, without PHS Poly# labels. These areas are "no data" or "donuts" created by surrounding polygons. These polygons indicate that the species or habitat information is unknown or the area was not mapped.

### PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>PHS Poly#</th>
      <th>Form#</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>912576</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>908057-908058</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>908057-908058-913950</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>918601</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

RECEIVED  
JUL 2 4 2009  
CWEC-S  

---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## PRIORITY HABITATS AND SPECIES POLYGON REPORT  
### IN THE VICINITY OF T20R45E SECTION 13  
**Report Date:** July 20, 2009  

### Information About Priority Habitats and Polygon Report  
Priority Habitats and Species (PHS) polygons are labeled, on the map, with a unique number (PHS Poly#) and "+" symbol, roughly in the center of the polygon. This PHS Poly# refers to a list of polygon numbers and form numbers (Form#) contained in the PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report. The Form#s refer to the PHS Polygon Report, listed below. This report details each species or habitat depicted as a polygon on the map.

----

### Priority Habitats and Species Polygon Summary List  
This report and the accompanying maps contain species and habitats that are considered to be priorities for conservation and management by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). The most current Priority Habitat and Species List is available on our web site at http://www.wdfw.wa.gov/hab/phslist.htm. YES or Y under the **"Priority"** column in the Summary List below indicates the species or habitat occurrence is on WDFW's Priority Habitats and Species List (PHS). The occurrence has been refined to match the priority area listed for the species or habitat on the PHS List (e.g., any occurrence, breeding areas, regular concentrations). NULL or Blank under the **"Priority"** column indicates the species or habitat occurrence is not on WDFW's PHS List.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Priority</th>
<th>State Status</th>
<th>PHS Code</th>
<th>Common Name</th>
<th>Species Use Criteria</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>ALAL</td>
<td>MOOSE</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>CEEL</td>
<td>ELK</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>CEELN</td>
<td>ROCKY MOUNTAIN ELK</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>ODVIO</td>
<td>NORTHWEST WHITE-TAILED DEER</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>RIPAR</td>
<td>RIPARIAN ZONES</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

----

### PHS Polygon Report

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Form#:</th>
<th>908057</th>
<th>PHS Code:</th>
<th>CEEL</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Season:</td>
<td>WSUF</td>
<td>Scientific Name:</td>
<td>CERVUS ELAPHUS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Species Use Criteria:</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
<td>Common Name:</td>
<td>ELK</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Priority:</td>
<td>YES</td>
<td>Accuracy:</td>
<td>ACCURATE WITHIN A HALF MILE</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>State Status:</td>
<td></td>
<td>Federal Status:</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Site Name:</td>
<td>TEKOA MOUNTAIN</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>General Description:</td>
<td colspan="3">ELK WINTER RANGE, REGULAR SMALL CONCENTRATIONS</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

----

### Source Information

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Source Date:</th>
<th>Source:</th>
<th>Source Code:</th>
<th>Synopsis:</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>90</td>
<td>COBURN, GEORGE WDW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>PERIODIC SEASONAL REVIEWS, WILDLIFE INFORCEMENT PATROL DISTRICT 1970-1990</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>92</td>
<td>CARMICHAEL, BROOKS</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>PERIODIC SEASONAL REVIEWS, WILDLIFE PATROL DISTRICT 1990-1992</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>92</td>
<td>HICKMAN, JERRY WDW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE</td>
<td>TREND</td>
<td>WDW AERIAL WINTER SURVEYS CONDUCTED PERIODICALLY FROM 1982-1992</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>121694</td>
<td>ANDONAEGUI, CARMEN WDFW</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>PROF KNOWLEDGE AND FIELD OBSERVATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>121694</td>
<td>WHALEN, JOHN WDFW 1988 TO PRESENT</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>PROF KNOWLEDGE AND FIELD OBSERVATION</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

# PHS Polygon Report

* **Source Date:** 081297  
  **Source:** HICKMAN, JERRY WDFW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** RMEF ELK HABITAT MAPPING PROJECT.  
  AERIAL AND GROUND SURVEYS FOR 19 YEARS.

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** SPOKANE COUNTY PARCEL DATA LAYER  
  **Source Code:** MAP  
  **Synopsis:** 

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** ATAMIAN, MIKE WDFW WILDLIFE DISTRICT BIOLOGIST  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** ELK POLYGON 918600 MERGED WITH ELK POLYGON 918601. POLYGONS WERE MODIFIED TO REMOVE URBAN AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT THAT NO LONGER FUNCTION FOR ELK HABITAT.

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** SPOKANE COUNTY PARCEL DATA LAYER  
  **Source Code:** MAP  
  **Synopsis:** 

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** ATAMIAN, MIKE WDFW WILDLIFE DISTRICT BIOLOGIST  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** ELK POLYGON 918600 MERGED WITH ELK POLYGON 918601. POLYGONS WERE MODIFIED TO REMOVE URBAN AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT THAT NO LONGER FUNCTION FOR ELK HABITAT.

---

# WHITMAN COUNTY  
*Updated 4/15/2008*

## LISTED

### Endangered

None

### Threatened  
*Silene spaldingii* (Spalding's silene), plant  
*Spiranthes diluvialis* (Ute ladies'-tresses), plant

## SPECIES OF CONCERN

### Animals  
* Bald eagle (*Haliaeetus leucocephalus*) (delisted, monitor status)  
* Burrowing owl (*Athene cunicularia*)  
* California floater (*Anodonta californiensis*), mussel  
* Ferruginous hawk (*Buteo regalis*)  
* Giant Columbia spire snail (*Fluminicola columbiana*)  
* Loggerhead shrike (*Lanius ludovicianus*)  
* Long-eared myotis (*Myotis evotis*)  
* Northern goshawk (*Accipiter gentilis*)  
* Northern leopard frog (*Rana pipiens*)  
* Pallid Townsend's big-eared bat (*Corynorhinus townsendii pallescens*)  
* Redband trout (*Oncorhynchus mykiss*)  
* Sagebrush lizard (*Sceloporus graciosus*)  
* Westslope cutthroat trout (*Oncorhynchus clarki lewisi*)

### Vascular Plants  
* *Aster jessicae* (Jessica's aster)  
* *Calochortus longebarbatus* var. *longebarbatus* (Long-bearded sego lily)  
* *Calochortus nitidus* (Broad-fruit mariposa)  
* *Cypripedium fasciculatus* (Clustered lady's-slipper)  
* *Haplopappus liatriformis* (Palouse goldenweed)  
* *Polemonium pectinatum* (Washington polemonium)  
* *Rubus nigerrimus* (Northwest raspberry)  

---

# STATE OF WASHINGTON  
## DEPARTMENT OF ECOLOGY  
PO Box 47600 • Olympia, WA 98504-7600 • 360-407-6000  
711 for Washington Relay Service • Persons with a speech disability can call 877-833-6341  

----

**August 25, 2009**

City of Tekoa  
Attn: Kynda Browning, Clerk/Treasurer  
Post Office Box 927  
419 Washington Street  
Tekoa, Washington 99033  

----

### RE: Request for Comments—City of Tekoa 2011 Water/Sewer Improvement Projects

Dear Ms. Browning,

The Department of Ecology, Shorelands and Environmental Assistance Program received your request for comments regarding the replacement of portions of the City’s drinking water system and the City’s sewer collection system to address deficiencies related to the age and condition of the systems. I have provided some general comments below:

1. If the project will impact wetlands or require in-water (below the ordinary high water mark) work, a Section 401 Water Quality Certification may be necessary. The information provided indicates that there will be a stream crossing within the project area. Please contact the Army Corps of Engineers (Tim Erkel, 509-238-4570) and the Federal Permit Manager at Ecology’s Eastern Regional Office (Michael Maher, 509-329-3584) to discuss the project and any potential permitting requirements.

2. Since the proposal includes work within shoreline jurisdiction (usually within 200 feet of a waterbody), please work with local permitting staff to discuss shoreline permit requirements. For additional information about shoreline permits, please contact Michael Maher, Department of Ecology, at 509-329-3584.

Feel free to contact me if you have any questions. I can be reached at 360-407-7421 or jemo461@ecy.wa.gov.

Sincerely,  

Jessica Moore  
Federal Consistency Coordinator  
Environmental Review and Transportation Section  
Shorelands and Environmental Assistance Program  

----

**RECEIVED**  
SEP 0 4 2009  
CWEC-SP
