# 2018-05-18-reccomendation-of-award.pdf

# CENTURY WEST ENGINEERING

May 21, 2018  
City of Tekoa  
P.O. Box 927  
Tekoa, WA 99033  

**Attention:** Mayor John Jaeger and City Council  
**Regarding:** 2018 Infiltration and Inflow Reduction Project  
Recommendation of Award  

Dear Mayor Jaeger and Council;

On May 4, 2018, sealed bids were opened for the 2018 Infiltration and Inflow Reduction Project. A total of two bids were received. Contractors submitting bids were DW Excavating, Inc., and S&L Underground, Inc.

A summary of the bids and the Engineer’s Estimate is provided below:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>DW Excavating</th>
      <th>S&amp;L Underground</th>
      <th>Engineer’s Estimate</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Base Bid Schedules A</td>
      <td>$530,917.70</td>
      <td>$548,823.81</td>
      <td>$495,918.92</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Additive Alternate 1 Schedule B</td>
      <td>$104,951.92</td>
      <td>$134,324.19</td>
      <td>$92,069.39</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Base Bid + Additive Alternate</td>
      <td>$635,869.62</td>
      <td>$683,148.00</td>
      <td>$587,988.31</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

DW Excavating, Inc. of Davenport, WA was the lowest responsive bidder with a total Base Bid of $530,917.70. This bid was 7% above the Engineer’s Estimate. No errors were found any of the bids. A copy of the full bid tabulation is attached for your review.

The low bid was properly signed and executed and included a bid bond and subcontractor’s list. A check of the Washington State Labor & Industries Contractor Database showed that DW Excavating has a valid contractor’s license and a check of the System for Award Management (SAM.GOV) did not show any active exclusions preventing award of the project.

Based upon our understanding of the available funds and review of the bids, Century West Engineering recommends that the City of Tekoa award the construction contract to DW Excavating, Inc. for the Total Base Bid plus Additive Alternate in the amount of $635,869.62.

Please call with any questions or comments regarding this recommendation.

Sincerely,  
**CENTURY WEST ENGINEERING CORPORATION**

*signature*

Matt Morkert, P.E.  
Project Manager  
Enclosure  

11707 E. Montgomery Drive  
Spokane Valley, WA 99206  
509.838.3810 office  
509.624.0355 fax
