# dahp-concurrence-3-30-2010.pdf

# STATE OF WASHINGTON  
## DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY & HISTORIC PRESERVATION  
*1063 S. Capitol Way, Suite 106 • Olympia, Washington 98501*  
*Mailing address: PO Box 48343 • Olympia, Washington 98504-8343*  
*(360) 586-3065 • Fax Number (360) 586-3067 • Website: www.dahp.wa.gov*  

March 30, 2010  

Ms. Janice Roderick  
USDA – Rural Development  
1835 Black Lake Blvd. SW, Suite B  
Olympia, Washington 98512-5716  

Re: City of Tekoa Water & Sewer Improvements Project  
Log No: 080609-05-USDA-RD  

Dear Ms. Roderick;  

Thank you for contacting our department. We have reviewed the professional archaeological survey report you provided for the proposed City of Tekoa Water & Sewer Improvements Project in Whitman County, Washington.  

We concur with your Determination of No Historic Properties Affected. We concur with the proposed stipulation for archaeological monitoring. Please provide the monitoring report when available.  

We would appreciate receiving any correspondence or comments from concerned tribes or other parties that you receive as you consult under the requirements of 36CFR800.4(a)(4).  

These comments are based on the information available at the time of this review and on the behalf of the State Historic Preservation Officer in conformance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and its implementing regulations 36CFR800. Should additional information become available, our assessment may be revised. In the event that archaeological or historic materials are discovered during project activities, work in the immediate vicinity should be discontinued, the area secured, and this department and the concerned tribe notified by you. Thank you for the opportunity to comment and a copy of these comments should be included in subsequent environmental documents.  

Sincerely,  

Robert G. Whitlam, Ph.D.  
State Archaeologist  
(360) 586-3080  
email: `rob.whitlam@dahp.wa.gov`  

----

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY & HISTORIC PRESERVATION  
*Protect the Past, Shape the Future*
