# 2002_ecology_npdes_permit_wa0023141_tekoa.pdf

# NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM  
## WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT No. WA-002314-1

State of Washington  
DEPARTMENT OF ECOLOGY  
Olympia, Washington 98504-7600  

In compliance with the provisions of  
The State of Washington Water Pollution Control Law  
Chapter 90.48 Revised Code of Washington  
and  
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act  
(The Clean Water Act)  
Title 33 United States Code, Section 1251 et seq.

City of Tekoa  
P.O. Box 927  
Tekoa, WA 99033  

<table>
  <tr>
    <td><u>Plant Location</u>:</td>
    <td>West edge of town, south of SR27 above Hangman Creek</td>
    <td><u>Receiving Water</u>:</td>
    <td>Hangman (Latah) Creek</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><u>Water Body I.D. No.</u>:</td>
    <td>WA-56-1010</td>
    <td><u>Discharge Location</u>:</td>
    <td>
      Latitude: 47° 13' 40" N<br>
      Longitude: 117° 04' 50" W
    </td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td colspan="4"><u>Plant Type</u>: Complete mix activated sludge process with nitrification, chlorination and dechlorination, aerobic sludge digestion and drying beds.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

is authorized to discharge in accordance with the special and general conditions that follow.

James M. Bellatty  
Water Quality Section Manager  
Eastern Regional Office

---

# TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY OF PERMIT REPORT SUBMITTALS  
.....................................................................4

## SPECIAL CONDITIONS

### S1. DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS  
............................................................................................5  
* A. Effluent Limitations  
* B. Mixing Zone Descriptions  

### S2. MONITORING REQUIREMENTS  
....................................................................................6  
* A. Monitoring Schedule  
* B. Sampling and Analytical Procedures  
* C. Flow Measurement  
* D. Laboratory Accreditation  

### S3. REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS  
...........................................7  
* A. Reporting  
* B. Records Retention  
* C. Recording of Results  
* D. Additional Monitoring by the Permittee  
* E. Noncompliance Notification  

### S4. FACILITY LOADING  
........................................................................................................9  
* A. Design Criteria  
* C. Duty to Mitigate  
* D. Notification of New or Altered Sources  
* E. Wasteload Assessment  

### S5. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE  
.............................................................................11  
* A. Certified Operator  
* B. O & M Program  
* C. Short-term Reduction  
* D. Electrical Power Failure  
* E. Prevent Connection of Inflow  
* F. Bypass Procedures  
* G. Operations and Maintenance Manual  

### S6. PRETREATMENT  
............................................................................................................14  
* A. General Requirements  
* B. Wastewater Discharge Permit Required  
* C. Identification and Reporting of Existing, New, and Proposed Industrial Users  
* D. Duty to Enforce Discharge Prohibitions  

### S7. RESIDUAL SOLIDS  
.........................................................................................................16  

### S8. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE  
............................................................................................16  

---

# GENERAL CONDITIONS

G1.  SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS .....................................................................................17  
G2.  RIGHT OF INSPECTION AND ENTRY .........................................................................18  
G3.  PERMIT ACTIONS ...........................................................................................................18  
G4.  REPORTING A CAUSE FOR MODIFICATION ............................................................19  
G5.  PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED ...........................................................................................19  
G6.  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND STATUTES .............................................20  
G7.  DUTY TO REAPPLY .......................................................................................................20  
G9.  REDUCED PRODUCTION FOR COMPLIANCE ..........................................................20  
G10. REMOVED SUBSTANCES .............................................................................................21  
G11. DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION ...........................................................................21  
G12. OTHER REQUIREMENTS OF 40 CFR .........................................................................21  
G13. ADDITIONAL MONITORING .......................................................................................21  
G14. PAYMENT OF FEES .......................................................................................................21  
G15. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING PERMIT CONDITIONS .............................................21  
G16. UPSET ...............................................................................................................................21  
G17. PROPERTY RIGHTS .......................................................................................................22  
G18. DUTY TO COMPLY ........................................................................................................22  
G19. TOXIC POLLUTANTS ...................................................................................................22  
G20. PENALTIES FOR TAMPERING .....................................................................................22  
G21. REPORTING PLANNED CHANGES .............................................................................22  
G22. REPORTING ANTICIPATED NON-COMPLIANCE .....................................................23  
G23. REPORTING OTHER INFORMATION ..........................................................................23  
G24. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO EXISTING MANUFACTURING,  
     COMMERCIAL, MINING, AND SILVICULTURAL DISCHARGERS .......................23  
G25. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES .........................................................................................24  

---

# SUMMARY OF PERMIT REPORT SUBMITTALS

Refer to the Special and General Conditions of this permit for additional submittal requirements.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Permit Section</th>
      <th>Submittal</th>
      <th>Frequency</th>
      <th>First Submittal Date</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>S3.</td>
      <td>Discharge Monitoring Report</td>
      <td>Monthly</td>
      <td>January 15, 2002</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S3.E</td>
      <td>Noncompliance Notification</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S4.B.</td>
      <td>Plans for Maintaining Adequate Capacity</td>
      <td>see compliance schedule in S8.</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S4.C.</td>
      <td>Notification of New or Altered Sources</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S4.E.</td>
      <td>Waste load Assessment</td>
      <td>Annually</td>
      <td>March 1, 2003</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S5.G.</td>
      <td>Operations and Maintenance Manual Update or Review Confirmation Letter</td>
      <td>Annually</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S8.</td>
      <td>Compliance Schedule – submit scope of work by</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>December 30, 2002</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S8.</td>
      <td>Submit Engineering Report for approval</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>December 30, 2005</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>S8.</td>
      <td>Submit Construction Documents for approval</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>December 30, 2007</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G1.</td>
      <td>Notice of Change in Authorization</td>
      <td>as necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G4.</td>
      <td>Permit Application for Substantive Changes to the Discharge</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G5.</td>
      <td>Engineering Report for Construction or Modification Activities</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G7.</td>
      <td>Application for Permit Renewal</td>
      <td>1/permit cycle</td>
      <td>January 1, 2007</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G21</td>
      <td>Notice of Planned Changes</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>G22</td>
      <td>Reporting Anticipated Non-compliance</td>
      <td>As necessary</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

5) Submission of and approval of construction documents for the Wastewater Collection System Improvements by December 30, 2007.


---

# SPECIAL CONDITIONS

## S1. DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS

### A. Effluent Limitations

All discharges and activities authorized by this permit shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of this permit. The discharge of any of the following pollutants more frequently than, or at a level in excess of, that identified and authorized by this permit shall constitute a violation of the terms and conditions of this permit.

Beginning on the effective date of this permit and lasting through the expiration date the Permittee is authorized to discharge municipal wastewater at the permitted location subject to complying with the following limitations:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3">EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS<sup>a</sup>: OUTFALL # 1</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Parameter</th>
      <th>Average Monthly</th>
      <th>Average Weekly</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Biochemical Oxygen Demand<sup>b</sup> (5 day)</td>
      <td>30 mg/L, 34.5 lbs/day</td>
      <td>45 mg/L, 51.7 lbs/day</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Total Suspended Solids<sup>b</sup></td>
      <td>30 mg/L, 34.5 lbs/day</td>
      <td>45 mg/L, 51.7 lbs/day</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Fecal Coliform Bacteria</td>
      <td>200/100 mL</td>
      <td>400/100 mL</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>pH<sup>c</sup></td>
      <td colspan="2">Daily minimum is equal to or greater than 6 and the daily maximum is less than or equal to 9.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th>Parameter</th>
      <th>Average Monthly</th>
      <th>Maximum Daily<sup>d</sup></th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Total Residual Chlorine</td>
      <td>4 ug/L</td>
      <td>19 ug/L</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Total Ammonia (as NH<sub>3</sub>-N)</td>
      <td>1.3 mg/L</td>
      <td>2.6 mg/L</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<sup>a</sup> The average monthly and weekly effluent limitations are based on the arithmetic mean of the samples taken with the exception of fecal coliform, which is based on the geometric mean.

<sup>b</sup> The average monthly effluent concentration for BOD5 and Total Suspended Solids shall not exceed 30 mg/L or 15 percent of the respective monthly average influent concentrations, whichever is more stringent.

<sup>c</sup> Indicates the range of permitted values. When pH is continuously monitored, excursions between 5.0 and 6.0, or 9.0 and 10.0 shall not be considered violations provided no single excursion exceeds 60 minutes in length and total excursions do not exceed 7 hours and 30 minutes per month. Any excursions below 5.0 and above 10.0 are violations. The instantaneous maximum and minimum pH shall be reported monthly.

<sup>d</sup> The maximum daily effluent limitation is defined as the highest allowable daily discharge. The daily discharge means the discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day. For pollutants with limitations expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is calculated as the total mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For other units of measurement, the daily discharge is the average measurement of the pollutant over the day.

---

B.  Mixing Zone Descriptions

The maximum boundaries of the mixing zones are defined as follows: 300 feet downstream and one quarter of the stream width at point of measurement.

## S2. MONITORING REQUIREMENTS

### A. Monitoring Schedule

<table>
    <tr>
        <td>Category </td>
        <td>Parameter </td>
        <td>Units </td>
        <td>Sample 
Point </td>
        <td>Minimum Sampling 

Frequency </td>
        <td>Sample 
Type </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Wastewater 

Influent </td>
        <td>BOD₅</td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>headworks </td>
        <td>once each week </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>TSS </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>headworks </td>
        <td>once each week </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>pH </td>
        <td>Standard Units </td>
        <td>headworks </td>
        <td>5 per week </td>
        <td>grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>Total Kjeldahl 

Nitrogen, TKN </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>headworks </td>
        <td>once each 2 weeks </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Wastewater 

Influent </td>
        <td>NH₃ (as N) </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>headworks </td>
        <td>once each 2 weeks </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Wastewater 

Effluent </td>
        <td>Flow </td>
        <td>MGD </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>continuous¹</td>
        <td>electronic </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>BOD₅</td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>one per week </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>TSS </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>one per week </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>pH </td>
        <td>Standard Units </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>5 per week </td>
        <td>grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>TKN (as N) </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>once each 2 weeks </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>NH₃ (as N) </td>
        <td>mg/L </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>once each 2 weeks </td>
        <td>24 hr. 
composite </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>“ </td>
        <td>Chlorine 

Residual </td>
        <td>ug/L </td>
        <td>effluent weir </td>
        <td>daily </td>
        <td>Grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Wastewater 

Effluent </td>
        <td>Fecal Coliform </td>
        <td>CFU / 100 mL </td>
        <td>Effluent </td>
        <td>one per week </td>
        <td>Grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td colspan="6"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Biosolids </td>
        <td>Total  Kjeldahl 

Nitrogen </td>
        <td>mg/kg dry wt </td>
        <td>drying beds </td>
        <td>once per year </td>
        <td>grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Biosolids </td>
        <td>Nitrate 

Nitrogen </td>
        <td>mg/kg dry wt </td>
        <td>drying beds </td>
        <td>Once per year </td>
        <td>grab </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Biosolids </td>
        <td>Metals ²</td>
        <td>mg/kg dry wt </td>
        <td>drying beds </td>
        <td>Once per year </td>
        <td>grab </td>
    </tr></table>

> 1 Continuous means uninterrupted except for brief lengths of time for calibration, for power failure, or for unanticipated equipment repair or maintenance. Sampling shall be taken four times during the work day when continuous monitoring is not possible.

---

2 Metals (biosolids) testing shall include: arsenic, cadmium, copper, lead, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver, and zinc. Mercury shall be tested with the cold vapor analytical method. Other metals shall be tested following "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods", EPA Publication SW-846.”

B.  Sampling and Analytical Procedures

Samples and measurements taken to meet the requirements of this permit shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored parameters, including representative sampling of any unusual discharge or discharge condition, including bypasses, upsets and maintenance-related conditions affecting effluent quality.

Sampling and analytical methods used to meet the monitoring requirements specified in this permit shall conform to the latest revision of the *Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants* contained in 40 CFR Part 136 or to the latest revision of *Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater* (APHA), unless otherwise specified in this permit or approved in writing by the Department of Ecology (Department).

C.  Flow Measurement

Appropriate flow measurement devices and methods consistent with accepted scientific practices shall be selected and used to ensure the accuracy and reliability of measurements of the quantity of monitored flows. The devices shall be installed, calibrated, and maintained to ensure that the accuracy of the measurements are consistent with the accepted industry standard for that type of device. Frequency of calibration shall be in conformance with manufacturer's recommendations and at a minimum frequency of at least one calibration per year. Calibration records shall be maintained for at least three years.

D.  Laboratory Accreditation

All monitoring data required by the Department shall be prepared by a laboratory registered or accredited under the provisions of, *Accreditation of Environmental Laboratories*, Chapter 173-50 WAC. Flow, temperature, settleable solids, conductivity, pH, and internal process control parameters are exempt from this requirement. Conductivity and pH shall be accredited if the laboratory must otherwise be registered or accredited.

### S3. REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS

The Permittee shall monitor and report in accordance with the following conditions. The falsification of information submitted to the Department shall constitute a violation of the terms and conditions of this permit.

---

A.  Reporting

The first monitoring period begins on the effective date of the permit. Monitoring results shall be submitted monthly. Monitoring data obtained during each monitoring period shall be summarized, reported, and submitted on a Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) form provided, or otherwise approved, by the Department. DMR forms shall be received by the Department no later than the 15th day of the month following the completed monitoring period, unless otherwise specified in this permit. Priority pollutant analysis data shall be submitted no later than forty-five (45) days following the monitoring period. Unless otherwise specified, all toxicity test data shall be submitted within 60 days after the sample date. The report shall be sent to the Permit Coordinator, Department of Ecology, Eastern Regional Office, 4601 North Monroe, Spokane, Washington 99205-1295.

All laboratory reports providing data for organic and metal parameters shall include the following information: sampling date, sample location, date of analysis, parameter name, CAS number, analytical method/ number, method detection limit (MDL), laboratory practical quantitation limit (PQL), reporting units, and concentration detected.

Discharge Monitoring Report forms must be submitted monthly whether or not the facility was discharging. If there was no discharge during a given monitoring period, submit the form as required with the words "no discharge" entered in place of the monitoring results.

B.  Records Retention

The Permittee shall retain records of all monitoring information for a minimum of three (3) years. Such information shall include all calibration and maintenance records and all original recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for this permit. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the Permittee or when requested by the Department.

C.  Recording of Results

For each measurement or sample taken, the Permittee shall record the following information:  
(1) the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling or measurement;  
(2) the individual who performed the sampling or measurement;  
(3) the dates the analyses were performed;  
(4) the individual who performed the analyses;  
(5) the analytical techniques or methods used; and  
(6) the results of all analyses.

D.  Additional Monitoring by the Permittee

If the Permittee monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by this permit using test procedures specified by Condition S2 of this permit, then the results of such monitoring shall be included in the calculation and reporting of the data submitted in the Permittee's DMR.


---

E.  Noncompliance Notification

In the event the Permittee is unable to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this permit due to any cause, the Permittee shall:  
1. Immediately take action to stop, contain, and cleanup unauthorized discharges or otherwise stop the noncompliance, correct the problem and, if applicable, repeat sampling and analysis of any noncompliance immediately and submit the results to the Department within (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.  
2. Immediately notify the Department of the failure to comply.  
3. Submit a detailed written report to the Department within thirty (30) days (five [5] days for upsets and bypasses), unless requested earlier by the Department. The report shall contain a description of the noncompliance, including exact dates and times, and if the noncompliance has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance.  

Compliance with these requirements does not relieve the Permittee from responsibility to maintain continuous compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit or the resulting liability for failure to comply.

# S4. FACILITY LOADING

## A. Design Criteria

Flows or waste loadings of the following design criteria for the permitted treatment facility shall not be exceeded:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Parameter</th>
<th>Design Quantity</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Monthly average flow (dry season)</td>
<td>0.14 MGD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Monthly average flow (max. month)</td>
<td>0.20 MGD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Monthly average flow (wet season)</td>
<td>0.30 MGD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Instantaneous peak flow</td>
<td>0.50 MGD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BOD<sub>5</sub> influent loading</td>
<td>230 lb./day</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TSS influent loading</td>
<td>230 lb./day</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Design population equivalent</td>
<td>1000</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B. Plans for Maintaining Adequate Capacity

When the actual flow or waste load reaches 85 percent of any one of the design criteria in S4.A for three consecutive months, or when the projected increases would reach design capacity within five years, whichever occurs first, the Permittee shall submit to the Department, a plan and a schedule for continuing to maintain capacity at the facility sufficient to achieve the effluent limitations and other conditions of this permit. This plan shall address any of the following actions or any others necessary to meet this objective.

---

1. Analysis of the present design including the introduction of any process modifications that would establish the ability of the existing facility to achieve the effluent limits and other requirements of this permit at specific levels in excess of the existing design criteria specified in paragraph A above.

2. Reduction or elimination of excessive infiltration and inflow of uncontaminated ground and surface water into the sewer system.

3. Limitation on future sewer extensions or connections or additional waste loads.

4. Modification or expansion of facilities necessary to accommodate increased flow or waste load.

5. Reduction of industrial or commercial flows or waste loads to allow for increasing sanitary flow or waste load.

Engineering documents associated with the plan must meet the requirements of WAC 173-240-060, "Engineering Report," and be approved by the Department prior to any construction. The plan shall specify any contracts, ordinances, methods for financing, or other arrangements necessary to achieve this objective.

## C. Duty to Mitigate

The Permittee is required to take all reasonable steps to minimize or prevent any discharge or sludge use or disposal in violation of this permit that has a reasonable likelihood of adversely affecting human health or the environment

## D. Notification of New or Altered Sources

The Permittee shall submit written notice to the Department whenever any new discharge or a substantial change in volume or character of an existing discharge into the POTW is proposed which:  
(1) would interfere with the operation of, or exceed the design capacity of, any portion of the POTW;  
(2) is not part of an approved general sewer plan or approved plans and specifications; or  
(3) would be subject to pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403 and Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act.  

This notice shall include an evaluation of the POTW's ability to adequately transport and treat the added flow and/or waste load, the quality and volume of effluent to be discharged to the POTW, and the anticipated impact on the Permittee’s effluent [40 CFR 122.42(b)].

## E. Wasteload Assessment

The Permittee shall conduct an annual assessment of their flow and wasteload and submit a report to the Department by March 1, 2003; and annually thereafter. The report shall contain the following: an indication of compliance or noncompliance with the permit effluent limitations; a comparison between the existing and design monthly average dry weather and wet weather flows, peak flows, BOD₅, CBOD₅, total suspended solids loadings, total kjeldahl nitrogen, ammonia; and (except for the first report) the percentage increase in these parameters since the last annual report. The report shall also state the present population equivalent, projected population growth

---

## S5. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

The Permittee shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed to achieve compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit. Proper operation and maintenance also includes adequate laboratory controls and appropriate quality assurance procedures. This provision requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar systems, which are installed by a Permittee only when the operation is necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions of this permit.

### A. Certified Operator

An operator certified for at least a Class II plant by the state of Washington shall be in responsible charge of the day-to-day operation of the wastewater treatment plant. An operator certified for at least a Class I plant shall be in charge during all regularly scheduled shifts.

### B. O & M Program

The Permittee shall institute an adequate operation and maintenance program for their entire sewage system. Maintenance records shall be maintained on all major electrical and mechanical components of the treatment plant, as well as the sewage system and pumping stations. Such records shall clearly specify the frequency and type of maintenance recommended by the manufacturer and shall show the frequency and type of maintenance performed. These maintenance records shall be available for inspection at all times.

### C. Short-term Reduction

If a Permittee contemplates a reduction in the level of treatment that would cause a violation of permit discharge limitations on a short-term basis for any reason, and such reduction cannot be avoided, the Permittee shall give written notification to the Department, if possible, 30 days prior to such activities, detailing the reasons for, length of time of, and the potential effects of the reduced level of treatment. This notification does not relieve the Permittee of their obligations under this permit.

### D. Electrical Power Failure

The Permittee is responsible for maintaining adequate safeguards to prevent the discharge of untreated wastes or wastes not treated in accordance with the requirements of this permit during electrical power failure at the treatment plant and/or sewage lift stations either by means of alternate power sources, standby generator, or retention of inadequately treated wastes. The Permittee shall maintain Reliability Class II (EPA 430-99-74-001) at the wastewater treatment plant, which requires primary sedimentation and disinfection.

---

E.  Prevent Connection of Inflow

The Permittee shall strictly enforce their sewer ordinances and not allow the connection of inflow (roof drains, foundation drains, etc.) to the sanitary sewer system.

F.  Bypass Procedures

Bypass, which is the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a treatment facility, is prohibited, and the Department may take enforcement action against a Permittee for bypass unless one of the following circumstances (1, 2, or 3) is applicable.

1.  Bypass for essential maintenance without the potential to cause violation of permit limits or conditions.

- Bypass is authorized if it is for essential maintenance and does not have the potential to cause violations of limitations or other conditions of this permit, or adversely impact public health as determined by the Department prior to the bypass. The Permittee shall submit prior notice, if possible at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass.

2.  Bypass which is unavoidable, unanticipated and results in noncompliance of this permit.

This bypass is permitted only if:

- a. Bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which would cause them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.

- b. There are no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, stopping production, maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime (but not if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgement to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance), or transport of untreated wastes to another treatment facility.

- c. The Department is properly notified of the bypass as required in condition S3E of this permit.

3.  Bypass which is anticipated and has the potential to result in noncompliance of this permit

The Permittee shall notify the Department at least thirty (30) days before the planned date of bypass. The notice shall contain: (1) a description of the bypass and its cause; (2) an analysis of all known alternatives which would eliminate, reduce, or mitigate the need for bypassing; (3) a cost-effectiveness analysis of

---

alternatives including comparative resource damage assessment; (4) the minimum and maximum duration of bypass under each alternative; (5) a recommendation as to the preferred alternative for conducting the bypass; (6) the projected date of bypass initiation; (7) a statement of compliance with SEPA; (8) a request for modification of water quality standards as provided for in WAC 173-201A-110, if an exceedance of any water quality standard is anticipated; and (9) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.

For probable construction bypasses, the need to bypass is to be identified as early in the planning process as possible. The analysis required above shall be considered during preparation of the engineering report or facilities plan and plans and specifications and shall be included to the extent practical. In cases where the probable need to bypass is determined early, continued analysis is necessary up to and including the construction period in an effort to minimize or eliminate the bypass.

The Department will consider the following prior to issuing an administrative order for this type bypass:

a. If the bypass is necessary to perform construction or maintenance-related activities essential to meet the requirements of this permit.

b. If there are feasible alternatives to bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, stopping production, maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time, or transport of untreated wastes to another treatment facility.

c. If the bypass is planned and scheduled to minimize adverse effects on the public and the environment.

After consideration of the above and the adverse effects of the proposed bypass and any other relevant factors, the Department will approve or deny the request. The public shall be notified and given an opportunity to comment on bypass incidents of significant duration, to the extent feasible. Approval of a request to bypass will be by administrative order issued by the Department under RCW 90.48.120.

## G. Operations and Maintenance Manual

The approved Operations and Maintenance Manual shall be kept available at the treatment plant and all operators shall follow the instructions and procedures of this manual.

The O&M Manual shall be reviewed by the Permittee at least annually and the Permittee shall confirm this review by letter to the Department. Substantial changes or updates to the O&M Manual shall be submitted to the Department whenever they are incorporated into the manual.

---

# S6. PRETREATMENT

## A. General Requirements

The Permittee shall work with the Department to ensure that all commercial and industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) are in compliance with the pretreatment regulations promulgated in 40 CFR Part 403 and any additional regulations that may be promulgated under Section 307(b) (pretreatment) and 308 (reporting) of the Federal Clean Water Act.

## B. Wastewater Discharge Permit Required

The Permittee shall not allow significant industrial users (SIUs) to discharge wastewater to the Permittee's sewerage system until such user has received a wastewater discharge permit from the Department in accordance with Chapter 90.48 RCW and Chapter 173-216 WAC, as amended.

## C. Identification and Reporting of Existing, New, and Proposed Industrial Users

1. The Permittee shall take continuous, routine measures to identify all existing, new, and proposed SIUs and potential significant industrial users (PSIUs) discharging or proposing to discharge to the Permittee's sewerage system (see Appendix B of Fact Sheet for definitions).

2. Within 30 days of becoming aware of an unpermitted existing, new, or proposed industrial user who may be an SIU, the Permittee shall notify such user by registered mail that, if classified as an SIU, they shall be required to apply to the Department and obtain a State Waste Discharge Permit. A copy of this notification letter shall also be sent to the Department within this same 30-day period.

3. The Permittee shall also notify all PSIUs, as they are identified, that if their classification should change to an SIU, they shall be required to apply to the Department for a State Waste Discharge Permit within 30 days of such change.

## D. Duty to Enforce Discharge Prohibitions

1. In accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(a), the Permittee shall not authorize or knowingly allow the discharge of any pollutants into its POTW which cause pass through or interference, or which otherwise violates general or specific discharge prohibitions contained in 40 CFR Part 403.5 or WAC-173-216-060.

2. The Permittee shall not authorize or knowingly allow the introduction of any of the following into their treatment works:

   a. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW (including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21).

---

b. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, or greater than 11.0 standard units, unless the works are specifically designed to accommodate such discharges.

c. Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that could cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or otherwise interfere with the operation of the POTW.

d. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.

e. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

f. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity which may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

g. Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case heat in such quantities such that the temperature at the POTW headworks exceeds 40₀C (104₀F) unless the Department, upon request of the Permittee, approves, in writing, alternate temperature limits.

h. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Permittee.

i. Wastewaters prohibited to be discharged to the POTW by the Dangerous Waste Regulations (Chapter 173-303 WAC), unless authorized under the Domestic Sewage Exclusion (WAC 173-303-071).

3. All of the following are prohibited from discharge to the POTW unless approved in writing by the Department under extraordinary circumstances (such as a lack of direct discharge alternatives due to combined sewer service or the need to augment sewage flows due to septic conditions):

a. Noncontact cooling water in significant volumes.

b. Stormwater, and other direct inflow sources.

c. Wastewaters significantly affecting system hydraulic loading, which do not require treatment, or would not be afforded a significant degree of treatment by the system.

4. The Permittee shall notify the Department if any industrial user violates the prohibitions listed in this section.

---

# S7. RESIDUAL SOLIDS

Residual solids include screenings, grit, scum, primary sludge, waste activated sludge, and other solid waste. The Permittee shall store and handle all residual solids in such a manner so as to prevent their entry into state ground or surface waters. The Permittee shall not discharge leachate from residual solids to state surface or ground waters.

Any solids removed during the treatment process at the City of Tekoa Publicly Owned Treatment Works including incidental solids (rags, scum, and other debris) removed as part of the routine maintenance of the collection system, the wastewater conveyance facilities, the treatment works equipment that do not meet the minimum requirements for land application will be drained and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the Whitman County Health Department. Any biosolids removed from the treatment works will be handled and disposed of in a manner that complies with Ch. 173-308 WAC and the associated permit from the Department of Ecology.

# S8. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE

1) Submit a scope of work by December 30, 2002. In order to have a general idea of the cost and propose any needed adjustments to the proposed schedule including options for a shorter implementation schedule.

2) By December 30, 2005 submit and obtain approval of the engineering report covering the plan to maintain adequate capacity which is to include an infiltration and inflow assessment and recommendation, a cost effective analysis, and any recommended wastewater treatment facility upgrades as described and required by Chapter 173-240 WAC Submission of plans and reports for construction of wastewater facilities.

3) Submission of and approval of construction documents for the Wastewater Collection System Improvements by December 30, 2007.

---

# GENERAL CONDITIONS

## G1. SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS

All applications, reports, or information submitted to the Department shall be signed and certified.

A. All permit applications shall be signed by either a principal executive officer or a ranking elected official.

B. All reports required by this permit and other information requested by the Department shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative only if:

1. The authorization is made in writing by a person described above and submitted to the Department.

2. The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, position of equivalent responsibility, or an individual or position having overall responsibility for environmental matters. (A duly authorized representative may thus be either a named individual or any individual occupying a named position.)

C. Changes to authorization. If an authorization under paragraph B.2 above is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph B.2 above must be submitted to the Department prior to or together with any reports, information, or applications to be signed by an authorized representative.

D. Certification. Any person signing a document under this section shall make the following certification:

> I certify under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

---

## G2. RIGHT OF INSPECTION AND ENTRY

The Permittee shall allow an authorized representative of the Department, upon the presentation of credentials and such other documents as may be required by law:

A. To enter upon the premises where a discharge is located or where any records must be kept under the terms and conditions of this permit.

B. To have access to and copy - at reasonable times and at reasonable cost - any records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of this permit.

C. To inspect - at reasonable times - any facilities, equipment (including monitoring and control equipment), practices, methods, or operations regulated or required under this permit.

D. To sample or monitor - at reasonable times - any substances or parameters at any location for purposes of assuring permit compliance or as otherwise authorized by the Clean Water Act.

## G3. PERMIT ACTIONS

This permit may be modified, revoked and reissued, or terminated either at the request of any interested person (including the permittee) or upon the Department’s initiative. However, the permit may only be modified, revoked and reissued, or terminated for the reasons specified in 40 CFR 122.62, 122.64 or WAC 173-220-150 according to the procedures of 40 CFR 124.5.

A. The following are causes for terminating this permit during its term, or for denying a permit renewal application:

* Violation of any permit term or condition.

* Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose all relevant facts.

* A material change in quantity or type of waste disposal.

* A determination that the permitted activity endangers human health or the environment, or contributes to water quality standards violations and can only be regulated to acceptable levels by permit modification or termination [40 CFR part 122.64(3)].

* A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction, or elimination of any discharge or sludge use or disposal practice controlled by the permit [40 CFR part 122.64(4)].

* Nonpayment of fees assessed pursuant to RCW 90.48.465.

* Failure or refusal of the permittee to allow entry as required in RCW 90.48.090.

B. The following are causes for modification but not revocation and reissuance except when the permittee requests or agrees:

---

1. A material change in the condition of the waters of the state.

2. New information not available at the time of permit issuance that would have justified the application of different permit conditions.

3. Material and substantial alterations or additions to the permitted facility or activities which occurred after this permit issuance.

4. Promulgation of new or amended standards or regulations having a direct bearing upon permit conditions, or requiring permit revision.

5. The Permittee has requested a modification based on other rationale meeting the criteria of 40 CFR part 122.62.

6. The Department has determined that good cause exists for modification of a compliance schedule, and the modification will not violate statutory deadlines.

7. Incorporation of an approved local pretreatment program into a municipality’s permit.

C. The following are causes for modification or alternatively revocation and reissuance:

   1. Cause exists for termination for reasons listed in A1 through A7 of this section, and the Department determines that modification or revocation and reissuance is appropriate.

   2. The Department has received notification of a proposed transfer of the permit. A permit may also be modified to reflect a transfer after the effective date of an automatic transfer (General Condition G8) but will not be revoked and reissued after the effective date of the transfer except upon the request of the new permittee.

## G4. REPORTING A CAUSE FOR MODIFICATION

The Permittee shall submit a new application, or a supplement to the previous application, along with required engineering plans and reports whenever a material change to the facility or in the quantity or type of discharge is anticipated which is not specifically authorized by this permit. This application shall be submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to any proposed changes. The filing of a request by the Permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance does not relieve the Permittee of the duty to comply with the existing permit until it is modified or reissued.

## G5. PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED

Prior to constructing or modifying any wastewater control facilities, an engineering report and detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Department for approval in accordance with Chapter 173-240 WAC. Engineering reports, plans, and specifications shall be submitted at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the planned start of construction unless a shorter time is approved by Ecology. Facilities shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the approved plans.

---

# G6. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND STATUTES

Nothing in this permit shall be construed as excusing the Permittee from compliance with any applicable federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations.

# G7. DUTY TO REAPPLY

The Permittee shall apply for permit renewal at least 180 days prior to the specified expiration date of this permit.

# G8. TRANSFER OF THIS PERMIT

In the event of any change in control or ownership of facilities from which the authorized discharge emanate, the Permittee shall notify the succeeding owner or controller of the existence of this permit by letter, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the Department.

## A. Transfers by Modification

* Except as provided in paragraph (B) below, this permit may be transferred by the Permittee to a new owner or operator only if this permit has been modified or revoked and reissued under 40 CFR 122.62(b)(2), or a minor modification made under 40 CFR 122.63(d), to identify the new Permittee and incorporate such other requirements as may be necessary under the Clean Water Act.

## B. Automatic Transfers

This permit may be automatically transferred to a new Permittee if:

1. The Permittee notifies the Department at least 30 days in advance of the proposed transfer date.

2. The notice includes a written agreement between the existing and new Permittees containing a specific date transfer of permit responsibility, coverage, and liability between them.

3. The Department does not notify the existing Permittee and the proposed new Permittee of its intent to modify or revoke and reissue this permit. A modification under this subparagraph may also be minor modification under 40 CFR 122.63. If this notice is not received, the transfer is effective on the date specified in the written agreement.

# G9. REDUCED PRODUCTION FOR COMPLIANCE

The Permittee, in order to maintain compliance with its permit, shall control production and/or all discharges upon reduction, loss, failure, or bypass of the treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.

---

# G10. REMOVED SUBSTANCES

Collected screenings, grit, solids, sludges, filter backwash, or other pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall not be resuspended or reintroduced to the final effluent stream for discharge to state waters.

# G11. DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION

The Permittee shall submit to the Department, within a reasonable time, all information which the Department may request to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking and reissuing, or terminating this permit or to determine compliance with this permit. The Permittee shall also submit to the Department upon request, copies of records required to be kept by this permit [40 CFR 122.41(h)].

# G12. OTHER REQUIREMENTS OF 40 CFR

All other requirements of 40 CFR 122.41 and 122.42 are incorporated in this permit by reference.

# G13. ADDITIONAL MONITORING

The Department may establish specific monitoring requirements in addition to those contained in this permit by administrative order or permit modification.

# G14. PAYMENT OF FEES

The Permittee shall submit payment of fees associated with this permit as assessed by the Department.

# G15. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING PERMIT CONDITIONS

Any person who is found guilty of willfully violating the terms and conditions of this permit shall be deemed guilty of a crime, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day upon which a willful violation occurs may be deemed a separate and additional violation.

Any person who violates the terms and conditions of a waste discharge permit shall incur, in addition to any other penalty as provided by law, a civil penalty in the amount of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for every such violation. Each and every such violation shall be a separate and distinct offense, and in case of a continuing violation, every day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation.

# G16. UPSET

Definition – “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the Permittee. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

---

An upset constitutes an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with such technology-based permit effluent limitations if the requirements of the following paragraph are met.

A Permittee who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:  
1) an upset occurred and that the Permittee can identify the cause(s) of the upset;  
2) the permitted facility was being properly operated at the time of the upset;  
3) the Permittee submitted notice of the upset as required in condition S3.E; and  
4) the Permittee complied with any remedial measures required under S5 of this permit.

In any enforcement proceeding the Permittee seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset has the burden of proof.

### G17. PROPERTY RIGHTS

This permit does not convey any property rights of any sort, or any exclusive privilege.

### G18. DUTY TO COMPLY

The Permittee shall comply with all conditions of this permit. Any permit noncompliance constitutes a violation of the Clean Water Act and is grounds for enforcement action; for permit termination, revocation and reissuance, or modification; or denial of a permit renewal application.

### G19. TOXIC POLLUTANTS

The Permittee shall comply with effluent standards or prohibitions established under Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act for toxic pollutants within the time provided in the regulations that establish those standards or prohibitions, even if this permit has not yet been modified to incorporate the requirement.

### G20. PENALTIES FOR TAMPERING

The Clean Water Act provides that any person who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this permit shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $10,000 per violation, or by imprisonment for not more than two years per violation, or by both. If a conviction of a person is for a violation committed after a first conviction of such person under this Condition, punishment shall be a fine of not more than $20,000 per day of violation, or by imprisonment of not more than four (4) years, or by both.

### G21. REPORTING PLANNED CHANGES

The Permittee shall, as soon as possible, give notice to the Department of planned physical alterations or additions to the permitted facility, production increases, or process modification which will result in:  
1) the permitted facility being determined to be a new source pursuant to 40 CFR 122.29(b);  
2) a significant change in the nature or an increase in quantity of pollutants discharged; or  
3) a significant change in the Permittee’s sludge use or disposal practices.  

Following such notice, this permit may be modified, or revoked and

---

G22. REPORTING ANTICIPATED NON-COMPLIANCE

The Permittee shall give advance notice to the Department by submission of a new application or supplement thereto at least one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to commencement of such discharges, of any facility expansions, production increases, or other planned changes, such as process modifications, in the permitted facility or activity which may result in noncompliance with permit limits or conditions. Any maintenance of facilities, which might necessitate unavoidable interruption of operation and degradation of effluent quality, shall be scheduled during noncritical water quality periods and carried out in a manner approved by the Department.

G23. REPORTING OTHER INFORMATION

Where the Permittee becomes aware that it failed to submit any relevant facts in a permit application, or submitted incorrect information in a permit application, or in any report to the Department, it shall promptly submit such facts or information.

G24. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO EXISTING MANUFACTURING, COMMERCIAL, MINING, AND SILVICULTURAL DISCHARGERS

The Permittee belonging to the categories of existing manufacturing, commercial, mining, or silviculture must notify the Department as soon as they know or have reason to believe:

A. That any activity has occurred or will occur which would result in the discharge, on a routine or frequent basis, of any toxic pollutant which is not limited in this permit, if that discharge will exceed the highest of the following “notification levels:”

1. One hundred micrograms per liter (100 µg/l).

2. Two hundred micrograms per liter (200 µg/l) for acrolein and acrylonitrile; five hundred micrograms per liter (500 µg/l) for 2,4-dinitrophenol and for 2-methyl-4,6-dinitrophenol; and one milligram per liter (1 mg/l) for antimony.

3. Five (5) times the maximum concentration value reported for that pollutant in the permit application in accordance with 40 CFR 122.21(g)(7).

4. The level established by the Director in accordance with 40 CFR 122.44(f).

B. That any activity has occurred or will occur which would result in any discharge, on a non-routine or infrequent basis, of a toxic pollutant which is not limited in this permit, if that discharge will exceed the highest of the following “notification levels:”

1. Five hundred micrograms per liter (500 µg/L).


---

2. One milligram per liter (1 mg/L).

3. Ten (10) times the maximum concentration value reported for that pollutant in the permit application in accordance with 40 CFR 122.21(g)(7).

4. The level established by the Director in accordance with 40 CFR 122.44(f).

## G25. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES

Reports of compliance or noncompliance with, or any progress reports on, interim and final requirements contained in any compliance schedule of this permit shall be submitted no later than fourteen (14) days following each schedule date.
