# attachment-6-f-environmental-assessment.doc

# Environmental Assessment  
*(24 CFR 58.36) (Revised 8/04)*

<table>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>Grantee/Responsible Entity (City, Town or County):</strong></td>
    <td>City of Tekoa</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Grantee/Responsible Entity Address:</strong></td>
    <td><em>P.O. Box 927/ 419 N Washington, Tekoa, WA 99033</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Certifying Officer</strong> (Jurisdiction Chief Administrative Official):</td>
    <td><em>Mayor John Jaeger</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Preparer:</strong></td>
    <td><em>Anthony Fischer, E.I.T. (Century West Engineering Corp.)</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Date (Month/Year):</strong></td>
    <td><em>Nov, 2017</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Estimated Total Project Cost:</strong></td>
    <td><em>$790,000</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>List Proposed Funding Sources and Amounts:</strong></td>
    <td>
      <em>CDBG Grant: $750,000<br>
      Local Public: $40,000</em>
    </td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Project Name &amp; Brief Description:</strong></td>
    <td><em>2018 I/I Reduction Project</em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Project Location:</strong></td>
    <td><em>
      The project area is located within The City of Tekoa, including portions of Section 13 and Section 24, Township 20 North, Range 45 East and Section 19, Township 20 North, Range 46 East. Sewer lines to be replaced include those along East Main Street and Lindsey Street, North Crosby Street and Poplar Street, and along the ballpark from Warren Street to Seamon Road.
    </em></td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Project Representative:</strong></td>
    <td>John Jaeger (Mayor)</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td><strong>Telephone Number:</strong></td>
    <td>509-284-3861</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Conditions for Approval:  
*(List all mitigation measures adopted by the responsible entity to eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts. These conditions must be included in project contracts or other relevant documents as requirements). [24 CFR 58.40(d), 40 CFR 1505.2(c)]*

> The City shall require contractor to comply with all applicable stormwater, air quality, and erosion control requirements. Contractor shall use best management practices and construction practices to conduct work in a professional manner.

----

### FINDING: [58.40(g)]  

- [x] **Finding of No Significant Impact**  
  (The project will not result in a significant impact on the quality of the human environment)  
- [ ] **Finding of Significant Impact**  
  (The project may significantly affect the quality of the human environment)  

----

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Preparer Name and Title</td>
    <td>Print</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td>Preparer Signature</td>
    <td>Date</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td>Chief Administrative Official Name and Title</td>
    <td>Print</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td>Chief Administrative Official Signature</td>
    <td>Date</td>
  </tr>
</table>


---

# ATTACHMENT 6-F (2)  
## NEPA

### Statement of Purpose and Need for the Proposal: [40 CFR 1508.9(b)]:

The City of Tekoa completed a Comprehensive Sewer System Plan in November 2006, in which numerous improvements to the sewer system were identified.

The preparation of the plan was a requirement of the City’s NPDES permit. The plan identified several improvements to the system that were required to meet NPDES permit requirements to reduce infiltration and inflow. Many of the improvements in the plan were sewer line replacements along Hangman Creek. There are also several improvements across the city in areas with seasonally high groundwater.

This project is needed to reduce infiltration and inflow to the sewer system and reduce the influent flows to the treatment facility to meet NPDES permit requirements.

### Description of the Proposal:  
Include all contemplated actions, which logically are either geographically, or functionally a composite part of the project, regardless of the source of funding. [24 CFR 58.32, 40 CFR 1508.25]

*Some of the options considered for the sewer line rehabilitation include in-situ pipe lining, rerouting the sewer lines to existing right-of-way, and replacing the sewer lines along the same routes.*

### Existing Conditions and Trends:  
Describe the existing conditions of the project area and its surroundings, and trends likely to continue in the absence of the project. [24 CFR 58.40(a)]

*The project occurs in three separate areas of the City and occurs mostly along existing roadways.*

*There is a 5 block stretch of sewer slated for replacement along Washington, Poplar, and Crosby Streets, which includes a residential area, a park, Highway-27 and commercial businesses.*

*An approximate 2 block length of sewer is slated to be replaced from Warren Street, through vegetation and along an access road behind the baseball field, along Howard Street, and to Seamon Road.*

*Approximately 1700 LF of sewer will be replaced along East Main Street And Lindsey Street. Both stretches occur within residential areas.*

*The area surrounding Tekoa is mostly agricultural farmland.*

*The project is a replacement of existing sewer from existing areas, typically outside of Public ROW to Public ROW. If an existing sewer is located outside of the right-of-way, it will be replaced within the right-of-way.*

----

### Statutory Checklist [24CFR §58.5]  
Record the determinations made regarding each listed statute, executive order or regulation. Provide appropriate source documentation. [Note reviews or consultations completed as well as any applicable permits or approvals obtained or required. Note dates of contact or page references]. Provide compliance or consistency documentation. Attach additional material as appropriate. Note conditions, attenuation or mitigation measures required.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Factors</th>
<th>Determinations and Compliance Documentation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic Preservation<br>[36 CFR 800]</td>
<td><em>Project will not threaten or demolish historic or culturally important properties.</em><br><br>DAHP Letter: March 30<sup>th</sup>, 2010<br>Spokane Tribe Letter: March 25<sup>th</sup>, 2010</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="2">ATTACHMENT 6-F (3)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><b>Floodplain Management</b><br>[24 CFR 55, Executive Order 11988]</td>
      <td><i>The project will have no impacts on existing floodplains.</i><br><br>FEMA Flood Maps</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Wetlands Protection</b><br>[Executive Order 11990]</td>
      <td><i>Project does not involve new construction near or in any wetlands.</i><br><br>USFWS Wetlands Map</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Coastal Zone Management Act</b><br>[Sections 307(c), (d)]</td>
      <td><i>Project does not take place in one of the 15 counties covered by the Washington State CZM Program.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Sole Source Aquifers</b><br>[40 CFR 149]</td>
      <td><i>Project is not located within a USA-EPA designated sole source aquifer.<br><br>Project does not withdrawal from a sole source aquifer.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Endangered Species Act</b><br>[50 CFR 402]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact endangered species<br><br>WSDFW Letter, July 24<sup>th</sup> 2009</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Wild and Scenic Rivers Act</b><br>[Sections 7 (b), (c)]</td>
      <td><i>The project is not located within 1 mile of a listed Wild & Scenic River.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Air Quality</b><br>[Clean Air Act, Sections 176 (c) and (d), and 40 CFR 6, 51, 93]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact air quality.<br><br>WSDOE Letter, September 4<sup>th</sup> 2009</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Farmland Protection Policy Act</b><br>[7 CFR 658]</td>
      <td><i>Project is located on City owned property and will have no impact on Farmland.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Environmental Justice</b><br>[Executive Order 12898]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact LMI or minority populations.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><b>HUD Environmental Standards</b></th>
      <th><b>Determinations and Compliance Documentation</b></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><b>Noise Abatement and Control</b><br>[24 CFR 51 B]</td>
      <td><i>Project does not involve development of noise sensitive uses.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Toxic or Hazardous Substances and Radioactive Materials</b><br>[HUD Notice 79-33]</td>
      <td><i>Project will not generate toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials.<br>Proposed sites and adjacent properties are free of toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects near Hazardous Operations</b><br>[24 CFR 51 C]</td>
      <td><i>Project is not located near Hazardous operations<br><br>Project Site Inspection</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Airport Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones</b><br>[24 CFR 51 D]</td>
      <td><i>Project is not located near an airport<br><br>Project Site Inspection</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

# Environmental Assessment Checklist

[Environmental Review Guide HUD CPD 782, 24 CFR 58.40; Ref. 40 CFR 1508.8 & 1508.27]

Evaluate the significance of the effects of the proposal on the character, features and resources of the project area. Enter relevant base data and verifiable source documentation to support the finding. Then enter the appropriate impact code from the following list to make a finding of impact. **Impact Codes** (1) - No impact anticipated; (2) - Potentially beneficial; **(3)** - Potentially adverse; (4) - Requires mitigation; (5) - Requires project modification. Note names, dates of contact, telephone numbers and page references. Attach additional materials as needed. Note conditions or mitigation measures required.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Land Development</th>
      <th>Code</th>
      <th>Source or Documentation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td></td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3">ATTACHMENT 6-F (4)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Conformance with Comprehensive Plans and Zoning</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>The project involves replacing existing sewer lines. No new sewer lines will be constructed.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Compatibility and Urban Impact</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>This project will not encourage growth outside of the existing city limits.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Slope</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not significantly affect topography.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Erosion</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will have temporary effect on erosion during construction activities. Contractor will be required to use Best Management Practices to prevent erosion during construction and will restore areas disturbed by construction activities to pre-construction condition.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Soil Suitability</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>The project will not construct any new structures. The project will rehabilitate existing structures.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Hazards and Nuisances including Site Safety</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not contribute to or increase hazards or nuisances.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Energy Consumption</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td><i>Project will reduce energy consumption at the City wastewater treatment plant.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Noise</b> - Contribution to Community Noise Levels</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not increase ambient noise levels.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Air Quality</b><br>Effects of Ambient Air Quality on Project and Contribution to Community Pollution Levels</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will neither affect ambient air quality nor contribute to community pollution levels. Finished project does produce air emissions.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td><b>Environmental Design</b><br>Visual Quality - Coherence, Diversity, Compatible Use and Scale</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>All of the work will be subsurface and will not have a visual aesthetic component.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3"><b>Socioeconomic</b></th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th>Code</th>
      <th>Source or Documentation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Demographic Character Changes</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact demographics.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Displacement</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not displace any residential or commercial properties.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Employment and Income Patterns</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project will not impact employment and income patterns.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3"><b>Community Facilities</b></th>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <th>and Services</th>
      <th>Code</th>
      <th>Source or Documentation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Educational Facilities</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not impact education facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Commercial Facilities</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect commercial facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Health Care</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect health care.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Social Services</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect social services</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Solid Waste</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect solid waste facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Waste Water</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td><i>Project improves the wastewater collection system by reducing infiltration and inflow to the system and reducing flows to the wastewater treatment facility. The project is identified in the 2006 Comprehensive Sewer Plan.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Storm Water</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>Project does not affect the City’s stormwater facilities.</i></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Water Supply</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td><i>The project does not affect water supply.</i></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


---

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3">ATTACHMENT 6-F (5)<br>NEPA</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="3">Public Safety</td>
      <td>- Police</td>
      <td>The project will not affect police services.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Fire</td>
      <td>The project will not affect fire services.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Emergency Medical</td>
      <td>Project does not affect emergency medical facilities.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td rowspan="4">Open Space and Recreation</td>
      <td>- Open Space</td>
      <td>Project does not affect open space.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Recreation</td>
      <td>Project does not affect recreation facilities.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>- Cultural Facilities</td>
      <td>
        DAHP Letter, March 30<sup>th</sup> 2010<br>
        Spokane Tribe Letter, March 25<sup>th</sup>, 2010
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Transportation</td>
      <td>Project does not impact local transportation system.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Natural Features</th>
      <th>Source or Documentation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Water Resources</td>
      <td>Project will not affect water resources.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Surface Water</td>
      <td>No surface water impacts are expected.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Unique Natural Features and Agricultural Lands</td>
      <td>Project will not affect unique natural features.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Vegetation and Wildlife</td>
      <td>
        Project will have minimal effect on vegetation. All areas disturbed by Construction activities will be re-seeded and restored to pre-construction condition. Project will not affect wildlife.
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Other Factors</th>
      <th>Source or Documentation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Flood Disaster Protection Act [Flood Insurance] [§58.6(a)]</td>
      <td>
        Section 58.6 requires compliance with the Flood Disaster Protection Act. However, under <code>24 CFR 55.1 (b)(1)</code> the prohibitions are not applicable to HUD financial assistance under the State-administered CDBG Program (24 CFR part 570, subpart I). Therefore, the Act does not apply.
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Coastal Barrier Resources Act/ Coastal Barrier Improvement Act [§58.6(c)]</td>
      <td>
        Section 58.6 also requires compliance with the Coastal Barrier Resources Act. There are no Coastal Barrier Resource Areas in Washington State. Therefore, the Act does not apply.
      </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Airport Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone Disclosure [§58.6(d)]</td>
      <td>Project does occur near an airport.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Other Factors</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**Summary of Findings and Conclusions**

---

# ATTACHMENT 6-F (6)  
## NEPA

*Based upon our review of the project, it will not have a significant impact on the surrounding environment.*

### ALTERNATIVES TO THE PROPOSED ACTION  
**Alternatives and Project Modifications Considered**  
_[24 CFR 58.40(e), Ref. 40 CFR 1508.9]_  
(Identify other reasonable courses of action that were considered and not selected, such as other sites, design modifications, or other uses of the subject site. Describe the benefits and adverse impacts to the human environment of each alternative and the reasons for rejecting it.)

The alternative that the City considered for this project was *in-situ pipe lining.*

This alternative was not viable because it is necessary to relocate many of the sewer pipes out of private properties and/or saturated areas.

### No Action Alternative [24 CFR 58.40(e)]  
(Discuss the benefits and adverse impacts to the human environment of not implementing the preferred alternative).

No Action would lead the City to be in violation of their NPDES permit and potentially open themselves up to lawsuits. The flows to the treatment plant would keep increasing and the level of treatment of the sewer flows would decrease. This would increase the level of pollutants in the treatment plant effluent and be an adverse impact to the human environment.

### Mitigation Measures Recommended [24 CFR 58.40(d), 40 CFR 1508.20]  
(Recommend feasible ways in which the proposal or external factors relating to the proposal should be modified in order to eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts.)

The proposed project is expected to have minimal impact on the environment. The City will require the Construction Contractor to use best management practices to prevent environmental impacts. The finished project will not have a significant impact.

### Additional Studies Performed  
(Attach studies or summaries)

* City of Tekoa Comprehensive Sewer Plan, November 2006.  
* City of Tekoa Infiltration and Inflow Analysis, August 2017

### List of Sources, Agencies and Persons Consulted [40 CFR 1508.9(b)]

* Washington Department of Archeology and Historic Preservation  
* Spokane Tribe of Indians  
* FEMA Flood Map Service Center  
* US Fish & Wildlife National Wetlands Inventory Map  
* Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
