# attatchment-6-w-tribal-consultation-letter-nez-perce.docx

Nez Perce Tribe  
Attn: Patrick Baird, THPO  
P.O. Box 305  
Lapwai, ID 83540  

RE: Section 106 Consultation for 2018 Inflow and Infiltration Reduction Project  

Dear Mr. Patrick Baird:  

The City of Tekoa would like to invite the Nez Perce Tribe to comment on a proposed project in Tekoa, WA. The proposed project would use federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds awarded through the state of Washington and is an undertaking as defined in 36 CFR Part 800.16(y).  

The state CDBG Program is funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Section 104(g) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, federally designates the local government grant recipient to assume the status of federal official responsible for complying with environmental laws specified in HUD regulations, including NEPA and NHPA. Section 104(g) is implemented by HUD regulations in 24 CFR Part 58, which also specifies the environmental authorities with which a local government grant recipient must comply as part of its assumption of environmental responsibilities.  

Therefore, we provide you with the attached information regarding our proposed project and would appreciate hearing from you if the tribe knows of archeological, historic or cultural resources that might affect the project site. Please be specific as you can with comments or information. Since this review is time sensitive and must adhere to the provision in 36 CFR Part 800, we request that you submit comments within 30 days from receipt of this letter.  

Thank you in advance for any information you may be able to offer. If you have any questions, please contact Anthony Fischer at (509) 838-3810.  

Sincerely,  

(LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL)  

Enclosures: DAHP EZ-1 Form  

CC: Mary Jane Miles, Chairperson
