# wsdfw-letter-7-24-2009.pdf

# State of Washington  
## Department of Fish and Wildlife  

Mailing Address: 600 Capitol Way N. Olympia WA 98501-1091, (360) 902-2200, TDD (360) 902-2207  
Main Office Location: Natural Resources Building, 1111 Washington Street SE, Olympia WA  

**Date:** July 21, 2009  

Dear Habitats and Species Requester:  

Enclosed are the habitats and species products you requested from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). This package may also contain documentation to help you understand and use these products.  

These products only include information that WDFW maintains in a computer database. They are not an attempt to provide you with an official agency response as to the impacts of your project on fish and wildlife, nor are they designed to provide you with guidance on interpreting this information and determining how to proceed in consideration of fish and wildlife. These products only document the location of important fish and wildlife resources to the best of our knowledge. It is important to note that habitats or species may occur on the ground in areas not currently known to WDFW biologists, or in areas for which comprehensive surveys have not been conducted. Site-specific surveys are frequently necessary to rule out the presence of priority habitats or species.  

Your project may require further field inspection or you may need to contact our field biologists or others in WDFW to assist you in interpreting and applying this information. Generally, for assistance on a specific project, you should contact the WDFW Habitat Program Manager for your county and ask for the area habitat biologist for your project area. Refer to the enclosed directory for those contacts.  

Please note that sections potentially impacted by spotted owl management concerns are displayed on the 1:24,000 scale standard map products. If specific details on spotted owl site centers are required they must be requested separately.  

These products are designed for users external to the forest practice permit process and as such, does not reflect all the information pertinent to forest practice review. The Forest Practice Rules adopted August 22, 1997 by the Forest Practice Board and administered by the Washington Department of Natural Resources require forest practice applications to be screened against marbled murrelet detection areas and detection sections. Marbled murrelet detection locations are included in the standard priority habitats and species products, but the detection areas and detection sections are not included. If your project is affected by Forest Practice Regulations, you should specially request murrelet detection areas.  

WDFW updates this information as additional data become available. Because fish and wildlife species are mobile and because habitats and species information changes, project reviews for fish and wildlife should not rest solely on mapped information. Instead, they should also consider new information gathered from current field investigations. Remember, habitats and species information can only show that a species or habitat type is present, they cannot show that a species or habitat type is not present. These products should not be used for future projects. Please obtain updates rather than use outdated information.  

*November 2006*  

---

Because of the high volume of requests for information that WDFW receives, we need to charge for these products to recover some of our costs. Enclosed is an invoice itemizing the costs for your request and instructions for submitting payment.

Please note that sensitive information (e.g., threatened and/or endangered species) may be included in this request. These species are vulnerable to disturbances and harassment. In order to protect the viability of these species we request that you not disseminate the information as to their whereabouts. Please refer to these species presence in general terms. For example: "A Peregrine Falcon is located within two miles of the project area".

If your request required a Sensitive Fish and Wildlife Information Release Agreement and you or your organization has one on file, please refer to that document for conditions regarding release of this information.

For more information on WDFW you may visit our web site www.wdfw.wa.gov or visit the Priority Habitats and Species site at www.wdfw.wa.gov/hab/phspage.htm.

For information on the state's endangered, threatened, and sensitive plants as well as high quality wetland and terrestrial ecosystems, please contact the Washington Department of Natural Resources, Natural Heritage Program at P.O. Box 47014, Olympia Washington 98504-7014, by phone (360) 902-1667 or visit the web site at www.dnr.wa.gov/nhp.

If you have any questions or problems with the information you received please call me at (360) 902-2543 or fax (360) 902-2946.

Sincerely,  
Lori Guggenmos, PHS Data Release Manager  
Priority Habitats and Species  

Enclosures

---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## REGIONAL CONTACTS

For assistance with Priority Habitats and Species information, contact the appropriate regional office, listed below.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>County...</th>
<th>Contact...</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Asotin, Columbia, Ferry, Garfield, Lincoln, Pend Oreille, Spokane, Stevens, Walla Walla, Whitman</td>
<td>
Region 1 Office<br>
2315 North Discovery Place<br>
Spokane Valley, WA 99216-1566<br>
Phone: (509) 892-1001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adams, Chelan, Douglas, Grant Okanogan</td>
<td>
Region 2 Office<br>
1550 Alder Street NW<br>
Ephrata, WA 98823-9699<br>
Phone: (509) 754-4624
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Benton, Franklin, Kittitas, Yakima</td>
<td>
Region 3 Office<br>
1701 South 24<sup>th</sup> Avenue<br>
Yakima, WA 98902-5720<br>
Phone: (509) 575-2740
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Island, King, San Juan, Skagit, Snohomish, Whatcom</td>
<td>
Region 4 Office<br>
16018 Mill Creek Boulevard<br>
Mill Creek, WA 98012-1296<br>
Phone: (206) 775-1311
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Clark, Cowlitz, Klickitat, Lewis, Skamania, Wahiakum</td>
<td>
Region 5 Office<br>
2108 Grand Boulevard<br>
Vancouver, WA 98661<br>
Phone: (360) 696-6211
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Clallam, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, Kitsap, Mason, Pacific, Pierce, Thurston</td>
<td>
Region 6 Office<br>
48 Deveonshire Road<br>
Montesano, WA 98563-9618<br>
Phone: (360) 249-4628
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## PRIORITY HABITATS AND SPECIES POLYGON CROSS REFERENCE REPORT  
### IN THE VICINITY OF T20R45E SECTION 13  

**Report Date:** July 20, 2009  

Priority Habitats and Species (PHS) polygons are labeled, on the map, with a unique number (PHS Poly#) and "+" symbol, roughly in the center of the polygon. This PHS Poly# refers to a list of form numbers (Form#) contained in the PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report, listed below. The Form#s refer to the attached Priority Habitats and Species Polygon Report. This report details each species or habitat depicted as a polygon on the map.

There will be some polygons, on the map, without PHS Poly# labels. These areas are "no data" or "donuts" created by surrounding polygons. These polygons indicate that the species or habitat information is unknown or the area was not mapped.

### PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>PHS Poly#</th>
      <th>Form#</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>912576</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>908057-908058</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>908057-908058-913950</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>918601</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

RECEIVED  
JUL 2 4 2009  
CWEC-Sr

---

# WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE  
## PRIORITY HABITATS AND SPECIES POLYGON REPORT  
### IN THE VICINITY OF T20R45E SECTION 13  
**Report Date:** July 20, 2009  

### Information About Priority Habitats and Polygon Report  
Priority Habitats and Species (PHS) polygons are labeled, on the map, with a unique number (PHS Poly#) and "+" symbol, roughly in the center of the polygon. This PHS Poly# refers to a list of polygon numbers and form numbers (Form#) contained in the PHS Polygon Cross Reference Report. The Form#s refer to the PHS Polygon Report, listed below. This report details each species or habitat depicted as a polygon on the map.

----

### Priority Habitats and Species Polygon Summary List  
This report and the accompanying maps contain species and habitats that are considered to be priorities for conservation and management by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). The most current Priority Habitat and Species List is available on our web site at http://www.wdfw.wa.gov/hab/phslist.htm. YES or Y under the **"Priority"** column in the Summary List below indicates the species or habitat occurrence is on WDFW's Priority Habitats and Species List (PHS). The occurrence has been refined to match the priority area listed for the species or habitat on the PHS List (e.g., any occurrence, breeding areas, regular concentrations). NULL or Blank under the **"Priority"** column indicates the species or habitat occurrence is not on WDFW's PHS List.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Priority</th>
<th>State Status</th>
<th>PHS Code</th>
<th>Common Name</th>
<th>Species Use Criteria</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>ALAL</td>
<td>MOOSE</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>CEEL</td>
<td>ELK</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>CEELN</td>
<td>ROCKY MOUNTAIN ELK</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>ODVIO</td>
<td>NORTHWEST WHITE-TAILED DEER</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>YES</td>
<td></td>
<td>RIPAR</td>
<td>RIPARIAN ZONES</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

----

### PHS Polygon Report

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Form#:</th>
<th>908057</th>
<th>PHS Code:</th>
<th>CEEL</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Scientific Name:</td>
<td colspan="3">CERVUS ELAPHUS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Season:</td>
<td>WSUF</td>
<td>Common Name:</td>
<td>ELK</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Species Use Criteria:</td>
<td>REGULAR CONCENTRATION</td>
<td>Accuracy:</td>
<td>ACCURATE WITHIN A HALF MILE</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Priority:</td>
<td>YES</td>
<td>State Status:</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Federal Status:</td>
<td></td>
<td>Site Name:</td>
<td>TEKOA MOUNTAIN</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>General Description:</td>
<td colspan="3">ELK WINTER RANGE, REGULAR SMALL CONCENTRATIONS</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

----

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Source Date:</th>
<th>90</th>
<th>Source:</th>
<th>COBURN, GEORGE WDW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Source Code:</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>Synopsis:</td>
<td>PERIODIC SEASONAL REVIEWS, WILDLIFE INFORCEMENT PATROL DISTRICT 1970-1990</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Date:</td>
<td>92</td>
<td>Source:</td>
<td>CARMICHAEL, BROOKS</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Code:</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>Synopsis:</td>
<td>PERIODIC SEASONAL REVIEWS, WILDLIFE PATROL DISTRICT 1990-1992</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Date:</td>
<td>92</td>
<td>Source:</td>
<td>HICKMAN, JERRY WDW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Code:</td>
<td>TREND</td>
<td>Synopsis:</td>
<td>WDW AERIAL WINTER SURVEYS CONDUCTED PERIODICALLY FROM 1982-1992</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Date:</td>
<td>121694</td>
<td>Source:</td>
<td>ANDONAEGUI, CARMEN WDFW</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Code:</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>Synopsis:</td>
<td>PROF KNOWLEDGE AND FIELD OBSERVATION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Date:</td>
<td>121694</td>
<td>Source:</td>
<td>WHALEN, JOHN WDFW 1988 TO PRESENT</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Source Code:</td>
<td>PROF</td>
<td>Synopsis:</td>
<td>PROF KNOWLEDGE AND FIELD OBSERVATION</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

# PHS Polygon Report

* **Source Date:** 081297  
  **Source:** HICKMAN, JERRY WDFW SPOKANE REGIONAL OFFICE  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** RMEF ELK HABITAT MAPPING PROJECT.  
  AERIAL AND GROUND SURVEYS FOR 19 YEARS.

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** SPOKANE COUNTY PARCEL DATA LAYER  
  **Source Code:** MAP  
  **Synopsis:** 

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** ATAMIAN, MIKE WDFW WILDLIFE DISTRICT BIOLOGIST  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** ELK POLYGON 918600 MERGED WITH ELK POLYGON 918601. POLYGONS WERE MODIFIED TO REM  
  OVE URBAN AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT THAT NO LONGER FUNCTION FOR ELK HABITAT.

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** SPOKANE COUNTY PARCEL DATA LAYER  
  **Source Code:** MAP  
  **Synopsis:** 

* **Source Date:** 111408  
  **Source:** ATAMIAN, MIKE WDFW WILDLIFE DISTRICT BIOLOGIST  
  **Source Code:** PROF  
  **Synopsis:** ELK POLYGON 918600 MERGED WITH ELK POLYGON 918601. POLYGONS WERE MODIFIED TO REM  
  OVE URBAN AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT THAT NO LONGER FUNCTION FOR ELK HABITAT.

---

# WHITMAN COUNTY  
*Updated 4/15/2008*

## LISTED

### Endangered

None

### Threatened

* *Silene spaldingii* (Spalding's silene), plant  
* *Spiranthes diluvialis* (Ute ladies'-tresses), plant

## SPECIES OF CONCERN

### Animals

* Bald eagle (*Haliaeetus leucocephalus*) (delisted, monitor status)  
* Burrowing owl (*Athene cunicularia*)  
* California floater (*Anodonta californiensis*), mussel  
* Ferruginous hawk (*Buteo regalis*)  
* Giant Columbia spire snail (*Fluminicola columbiana*)  
* Loggerhead shrike (*Lanius ludovicianus*)  
* Long-eared myotis (*Myotis evotis*)  
* Northern goshawk (*Accipiter gentilis*)  
* Northern leopard frog (*Rana pipiens*)  
* Pallid Townsend's big-eared bat (*Corynorhinus townsendii pallescens*)  
* Redband trout (*Oncorhynchus mykiss*)  
* Sagebrush lizard (*Sceloporus graciosus*)  
* Westslope cutthroat trout (*Oncorhynchus clarki lewisi*)

### Vascular Plants

* *Aster jessicae* (Jessica's aster)  
* *Calochortus longebarbatus* var. *longebarbatus* (Long-bearded sego lily)  
* *Calochortus nitidus* (Broad-fruit mariposa)  
* *Cypripedium fasciculatus* (Clustered lady's-slipper)  
* *Haplopappus liatriformis* (Palouse goldenweed)  
* *Polemonium pectinatum* (Washington polemonium)  
* *Rubus nigerrimus* (Northwest raspberry)
