# 2020_ASCE_Pipelines_Enfinger_Paper.pdf

# Estimating Groundwater Infiltration in Sewers

Kevin L. Enfinger, P.E.¹ and Patrick L. Stevens, P.E.²

1 ADS Environmental Services, 340 The Bridge Street, Suite 204, Huntsville, AL,
E-mail: kenfinger@idexcorp.com

2 ADS Environmental Services, 340 The Bridge Street, Suite 204, Huntsville, AL,
E-mail: pstevens2@idexcorp.com

## Abstract

Infiltration and inflow (I/I) are common problems in sanitary sewer systems. While inflow typically gets most of the attention in wet weather, groundwater infiltration can also be a big problem in dry weather, silently stealing sewer capacity 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, 365 days per year. Groundwater infiltration cannot be measured directly but is often estimated from sewer flow monitor data using a variety of empirical methods.

The authors provide an overview and comparison of four methods, including the % Minimum Method, the Wastewater Production Method, the Stevens-Schutzbach Method, and the Mitchell Method. Examples of each method are provided using actual flow monitor data to further explore the performance of these methods and provide guidelines for proper application.

## Introduction

Dry weather flow conditions are characterized by evaluating flow monitor data observed during normal conditions, excluding wet weather events and the periods associated with the recovery from these events. The resulting dry day patterns are identified as diurnal patterns and result from the collective residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional sewer use from a given area. An example of the diurnal patterns observed in a residential area are shown in Figure 1, and the distinctive patterns of Weekday and Weekend residential flows are readily apparent (Enfinger, 2006). Diurnal patterns are often described in terms of minimum, average, and maximum flow rates (Qmin, Qavg, and Qmax) for both Weekday and Weekend Day Groups.

Observed dry weather flows are comprised of two components, including Wastewater Production (Qww) and Groundwater Infiltration (QGWI). These components are related to the average flow rate as shown in Equation (1),

$$ Q = Q_{ww} + Q_{GWI} $$

While QGWI is often of interest to wastewater professionals, it is not measured directly by flow monitors. Rather, it is generally assumed that 0 ≤ QGWI ≤ Qmin and is estimated using a variety of empirical methods, including the % Minimum Method, the Wastewater Production Method, the Stevens-Schutzbach Method, and the Mitchell Method. These methods and their guidelines for proper application are discussed in subsequent sections of the paper.
\n---\n

# Stevens-Schutzbach Method, and the Mitchell Method
An overview and comparison of these methods is provided in the following sections.

Figure 1: Weekday and Weekend Diurnal Patterns
- A chart showing Flow Quantity (MGD) versus Time (hours 0–24). It compares Weekdays and Weekends diurnal patterns with a base infiltration line.

## % Minimum Method

The % Minimum Method estimates groundwater infiltration as a percentage of the minimum flow rate as shown in Equation (2). This method is simple to use and intuitive to understand; as a result, it is widely used in practice (Vallabhaneni, 2007).

$$ Q_{GWI} = x \, Q_{min} $$

Mathematically, the percentage attributed to groundwater infiltration (x) can vary from 0% to 100% of the minimum flow rate. If the percentage is set to 0%, then none of the minimum flow rate is assumed to be groundwater infiltration, and Q_GWI = 0. If the percentage is set to 100%, then all of the minimum flow rate is assumed to be groundwater infiltration, and Q_GWI = Q_min. Values of x ranging from 50% to 90% are generally used in actual practice, with values of 80% and 90% most common.

Once groundwater infiltration is estimated using Equation (2), wastewater production is estimated using Equation (3) by subtracting groundwater infiltration from the average dry weather flow rate.

$$ Q_{ww} = Q_{avg} - Q_{GWI} $$

The application of the % Minimum Method is demonstrated in the following example:
\n---\n

# EXAMPLE

Flow monitor data are obtained from a given sewer basin, and dry weather flow conditions are characterized for both Weekday and Weekend Day Groups. Weekday Q_min, Q_avg, and Q_max are 0.103 MGD, 0.428 MGD, and 0.726 MGD, respectively. Weekend Q_min, Q_avg, and Q_max are 0.109 MGD, 0.459 MGD, and 0.873 MGD, respectively.

Use the % Minimum Method to estimate Q_GWI and Q_WW. Assume that x = 80%.

- (a) Calculate Q_GWI for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (2).
  Q_GWI = x Q_min = (0.80)(0.103) = 0.082 MGD

- (b) Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. Q_GWI = 0.087 MGD

- (c) Identify the Day Group with the minimum Q_GWI. This is the Weekday Day Group. Then, set Q_GWI equal to this value for both Day Groups. Therefore, Q_GWI is set equal to 0.082 MGD for both the Weekday and Weekend Day Groups

- (d) Calculate Q_WW for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (3).
  Q_WW = Q_avg − Q_GWI = 0.428 − 0.082 = 0.346 MGD

- (e) Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. Q_WW = 0.377 MGD

Note that the groundwater infiltration estimate for weekdays shown in Step (a) is different than the groundwater estimate for weekends shown in Step (b). However, common sense suggests that groundwater infiltration should be the same for both weekdays and weekends. This concern is resolved by identifying the minimum groundwater infiltration estimate, assigning it to both weekdays and weekends, and calculating wastewater production for weekdays and weekends, respectively, using this common value. This approach is also applied to the Wastewater Production Method, the Steven-Schutzbach Method, and the Mitchell Method in subsequent sections.

## Wastewater Production Method

The Wastewater Production Method assumes that the difference between the average and minimum flow rates is attributed to a percentage (x) of wastewater production, as shown in Equation (4).

$$ Q_{WW} = \frac{Q_{avg} - Q_{min}}{x} $$

Values of 88% and 90% are commonly used, and values of 70% and 75% have also been proposed (DeCoite, 1981 and Mitchell, 2007). Once wastewater production is estimated using Equation (4), groundwater infiltration is estimated using Equation (5) by subtracting wastewater production from the average dry weather flow rate.

$$ Q_{GWI} = Q_{avg} - Q_{WW} $$

Substituting Equation (4) into Equation (5) provides groundwater infiltration in one step as shown in Equation (6).

$$ Q_{GWI} = Q_{avg} - Q_{WW} = Q_{avg} - \frac{Q_{avg} - Q_{min}}{x} $$

\n---\n

# Wastewater Production Methods

The general assumption that 0 ≤ Q_GWI ≤ Q_min governs the allowable range of x, and this range is determined by solving Equation (6) for x when Q_GWI = 0 and Q_GWI = Q_min. Based on these assumptions, 1 − (Q_min/Q_avg) ≤ x ≤ 1. The application of the Wastewater Production Method is demonstrated in the following example:

## EXAMPLE

Flow monitor data are obtained from a given sewer basin, and dry weather flow conditions are characterized for both Weekday and Weekend Day Groups. Weekday Q_min, Q_avg, and Q_max are 0.103 MGD, 0.428 MGD, and 0.726 MGD, respectively. Weekend Q_min, Q_avg, and Q_max are 0.109 MGD, 0.459 MGD, and 0.873 MGD, respectively.

Use the Wastewater Production Method to estimate Q_GWI and Q_ww. Assume that x = 0.88 (88%).

Solution

(a) Calculate Q_GWI for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (6).

Q_GWI = Q_avg − (Q_avg − Q_min)/x
       = 0.428 − (0.428 − 0.103)/0.88
       = 0.059 MGD

(b) Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. Q_GWI = 0.061 MGD.

(c) Identify the Day Group with the minimum Q_GWI. This is the Weekday Day Group. Then set Q_GWI equal to this value for both Day Groups. Therefore, Q_GWI is set equal to 0.059 MGD for both the Weekday and Weekend Day Groups.

(d) Calculate Q_ww for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (3).

Q_ww = Q_avg − Q_GWI = 0.428 − 0.059 = 0.369 MGD

Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. Q_ww = 0.400 MGD.

## Stevens-Schutzbach Method

The Stevens-Schutzbach Method estimates groundwater infiltration based on the minimum and average flow rates using the relationship shown in Equation (7) (Mitchell, 2007).

$$
Q_{GW} = \frac{0.4\, Q_{min}}{1 - 0.6 \left(\frac{Q_{min}}{Q_{avg}}\right)^{0.7}}
$$

Once groundwater infiltration is estimated using Equation (7), wastewater production is estimated using Equation (3) by subtracting groundwater infiltration from the average dry weather flow rate. The application of the Stevens-Schutzbach Method is demonstrated in the following example:

\n---\n

# EXAMPLE

Flow monitor data are obtained from a given sewer basin, and dry weather flow conditions are characterized for both Weekday and Weekend Day Groups. Weekday Qmin, Qavg, and Qmax are 0.103 MGD, 0.428 MGD, and 0.726 MGD, respectively. Weekend Qmin, Qavg, and Qmax are 0.109 MGD, 0.459 MGD, and 0.873 MGD, respectively.

Use the Stevens-Schutzhach Method to estimate QGW and QWW:

Solution

(a) Calculate QGW for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (7).

$$
Q_{GW} = \frac{0.4\,Q_{min}}{1 - 0.6 \left( \frac{Q_{min}}{Q_{avg}} \right)^{0.7}}
$$

$$
Q_{GW} = \frac{0.4(0.103)}{1 - 0.6 \left( \frac{0.103}{0.428} \right)^{0.7}} = 0.057 \text{ MGD}
$$

(b) Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. \(Q_{GW} = 0.059\) MGD

(c) Identify the Day Group with the minimum \(Q_{GW}\). This is the Weekday Day Group. Then, set \(Q_{GW}\) equal to this value for both Day Groups. Therefore, \(Q_{GW}\) is set equal to 0.057 MGD for both the Weekday and Weekend Day Groups.

(d) Calculate \(Q_{WW}\) for the Weekday Day Group using Equation (3).

$$
Q_{WW} = Q_{avg} - Q_{GW} = 0.428 - 0.057 = 0.371 \text{ MGD}
$$

(e) Do the same for the Weekend Day Group. \(Q_{WW} = 0.402\) MGD

----

## Mitchell Method

The Mitchell Method uses the average flow rate and a minimum factor (MF) to determine an expected minimum flow (QMF). Actual and expected minimum flow rates are then used to estimate groundwater infiltration using an iterative solution as shown in Figure 2 (Mitchell, 2007).

Assume \(Q_{GW} = 0\) MGD
Compute MF
Compute \(Q_{GW} = f(MF)\)
Converge? 
- Yes → Done
- No → Update \(Q_{GW}\) and repeat

```
FIGURE 2: Iterative Solution for the Mitchell Method
```

The minimum factor is initially computed with Equation (8) assuming no groundwater, and groundwater infiltration is updated using Equation (9). Convergence is often achieved in no more than three iterations.

$$
MF = 0.222(Q_{avg} - Q_{GW})^{0.202}
$$

\n---\n

$$
Q_{GWI} = \frac{Q_{\min} - (MF)\,Q_{\text{avg}}}{1 - MF}
$$
\n---\n

# Conclusion

The previous sections demonstrate how to use various methods to estimate groundwater infiltration in sewers using flow monitor data. However, they do not demonstrate when to select one method over another. The order in which these methods are presented reflects the historical timeline on which they were developed from the Minimum Method and Wastewater Production Method in the 1970s to the Stevens-Schutzbach Method in the 1990s to the Mitchell Method in the 2000s, and the newer methods accommodate or resolve weaknesses of the older methods. Neither the Minimum Method nor the Wastewater Production Method account for basin size. As basin size increases, flow attenuation occurs. This phenomenon is not acknowledged by these two methods, and as a result, they tend to overstate groundwater infiltration in larger basins. Both the Stevens-Schutzbach Method and the Mitchell Method accommodate flow attenuation and provide more realistic estimates of groundwater infiltration in larger basins. The Stevens-Schutzbach Method does this entirely on empirical grounds, while the Mitchell Method accomplishes this while rooted in established minimum factors familiar from sewer design. This paper provides details for wastewater professionals to use each of these methods, as well as appropriate details and caveats to consider along the way.

## Acknowledgement

The authors acknowledge Ralph Petroff, Jim Schutzbach, and Paul Mitchell for their knowledge and expertise regarding groundwater infiltration at its estimation from sewer flow monitor data. They have provided many helpful discussions regarding the development and proper applications of these methods.

## References

- Enfinger, K.L. and Stevens, P.L. (2006). “Sewer Sociology – The Days of Our (Sewer) Lives.” Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation Technical Exhibition and Conference; Dallas, TX; Water Environment Federation: Alexandria, VA.
- Vallabhaneni, S., Chan, C.C., and Burgess, E.H. (2007). Computer Tools for Sanitary Sewer System Capacity Planning, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development: Washington, D.C. EPA/600/R-07/111.
- DeCoite, D.C.W, Tsugita, R.A., and Petroff, R. (1981). “Infiltration/Inflow Source Identification by Comprehensive Flow Monitoring,” Journal of the Water Pollution Control Federation, Volume 53, Issue 11, 1620-1626.
- Mitchell, Stevens, and Nazaroff. (2007). A Comparison of Methods and a Simple Empirical Solution to Quantifying Base Infiltration in Sewers. Water Practice, Volume 1, No. 6, 2007 Water Environment Federation.
